# Metadata
- Source: The Bottom Line
- Title: Than
- Original URL: https://www.thebottomline.org.uk/summaries/em/than/
- Scrape Date: 2025-07-17
- Summary Date: AUTO_FILL_IF_AVAILABLE

Than: A 2-hour diagnostic protocol for possible cardiac chest pain in the emergency department
Than, JAMA Internal Medicine. 2014,174(1):51-58
Clinical Question
In patients with suspected acute coronary syndrome does a rapid diagnostic pathway allow early discharge from hospital without more adverse effects when compared with a conventional diagnostic assessment and discharge plan?
Design
Randomised controlled trial
Computer generated
Block Randomisation
Blinding of personnel determining results of primary outcome
Setting
Single centre, Emergency Department, New Zealand
October 2010 – July 2012
Population
Inclusion: Adult patients with possible cardiac chest pain whose physician planned further observation/troponin testing
Exclusion: STEMI, other clear cause for chest pain, chest pain >12 hours, persisting chest pain, pregnancy
3594 assessed for eligibility of whom 544 randomised
Intervention
Low risk patients with a modified TIMI score of 0, and no new ischaemic ECG changes, underwent the rapid diagnostic pathway with a repeat Troponin 2 hours after the initial test.
If repeat Troponin test normal then patient discharged with outpatient stress test within 72 hours
If TIMI score >0 or new ischaemic ECG changes, then investigated in standard fashion
(Journal watch – accessed 30th May 2014)
Control
Repeat Troponin I assay at 6-12 hours
Follow up investigations at discretion of treating clinician
All Troponin tests were ARCHITECT Troponin I assay in both intervention and control group. This is not a high sensitivity troponin.
Outcome
Primary outcome: discharge within 6 hours of arrival and without a subsequent major adverse cardiac event (MACE) within 30 days.
MACE:
death (unless clearly non-cardiac)
cardiac arrest
emergency re-vascularisation
cardiogenic shock
ventricular arrhythmia or high degree atrioventricular block requiring intervention
acute MI
Significantly more patients were successfully discharged within 6 hours in the intervention group (19.3%) vs. the control group (11%). Difference 8.3% (95% C.I. 1.8-14, P=0.009)
Secondary outcome: Patients who had a MACE during follow-up (not including initial hospital visit)
0.4% in intervention group vs. 0.0% in control group
Authors’ Conclusions
The rapid diagnostic pathway is an effective and practical strategy to improve early discharge rates for some patients with chest pain
Strengths
Randomised controlled trial
Blinding of staff determining primary outcome
Weaknesses
Not powered to compare rates of MACE between intervention and control groups
Only 52 patients underwent the rapid diagnostic pathway.
Patients in the intervention and control group treated differently with regard to the follow up investigations that were arranged.
All patients that were discharged early had an outpatient stress test within 72 hours. This will limit the external validity of this trial as a number of institutions will not be able to provide this service.
Single centre
Only recruited between 0800 – 2200. If people who present at night are different in anyway then this trial may lack external validity.
The Bottom Line
A rapid diagnostic pathway for patients with suspected cardiac chest pain allowed earlier discharge of some low risk patients. However, further work is necessary before we can tell if this is a safe strategy, and therefore currently this strategy cannot be recommended.
Links
abstract
/ doi: 10.1001/jamainternmed.2013.11362
Editorial, Commentaries or Blogs
None
Metadata
Summary author:
@DavidSlessor
Summary date: 11 May 2014
Peer-review editor:
@stevemathieu75