# Metadata
- topic: 3.7 - Neurology - CC-Ep106-Spinal-Cord--96-Rosens-9th-Ed.
- source_folder: 3.7 - Neurology
- original_file: CC-Ep106-Spinal-Cord-Ch.-96-Rosens-9th-Ed..pdf

 
 
 
CrackCast Show Notes – Spinal Cord – September 2017 
www.canadiem.org/crackcast 
 
 
 
Chapter 96 – Spinal Cord 
 
Episode overview  
1. Describe the arterial supply of the spinal cord 
2. Label the spinal cord, and describe the major ascending and descending tracts 
3. List the features of transverse cord syndrome.  
4. Describe 3 common partial cord syndromes and list 3 most likely causes of each 
5. Differentiate between Conus Medullaris and Cauda Equina Syndromes 
6. List 10 causes of non-traumatic spinal cord dysfunction (6 intrinsic / 4 extrinsic) 
7. Describe the clinical features + management of each: 
a. Transverse Myelitis 
b. Spinal SAH 
c. Syringomyelia 
8. What are 4 causes of spinal cord infarction? And what is the common cord 
syndrome? 
9. List 5 RFs for spinal epidural abscess. And list 4 common bacteria implication in 
epidural abscess 
10. List 4 causes of spinal epidural hematoma 
11. List 4 possible investigations for spinal epidural abscess and diskitis. What are the 
expected findings? 
12. How does the treatment of diskitis differ from epidural abscess? 
13. Describe clinical presentation of spinal neoplasm, investigations and management. 
 
Wisecracks 
1. Spinal cord syndrome recap 
2. Immunodeficiency myelopathy ddx 
 
 
 
Rosen’s in Perspective 
 
“Like the brain, the spinal cord is covered by three meningeal layers: (1) the inner pial layer, 
(2) the arachnoid, and (3) the outer dural layer. At its lower end, the spinal cord tapers into 
the conus medullaris, then the lumbar and sacral nerve roots form the cauda equina as they 
descend caudally in the thecal sac before exiting the spinal canal at the respective foramina.  
 
There is a cervical enlargement (cord level C5 to T1) gives rise to the brachial plexus and 
subsequently to the peripheral nerves of the upper extremity. The lumbar enlargement (L2 to 
S3) gives rise to the lumbosacral plexus and peripheral nerves of the lower extremity. The 
space surrounding the spinal cord within the spinal canal is reduced in the area of the 
enlargements, potentially leaving the cord more vulnerable to compression in these regions.  
 
At each level, the anterior root conveys the outflow of the motor neurons in the anterior horn 
of the spinal cord, and the posterior root contains sensory neurons and fibers that convey 
sensory inflow.” - Rosen’s 9th Edition, Chapter 96 
 
 
 
CrackCast Show Notes – Spinal Cord – September 2017 
www.canadiem.org/crackcast 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Check out: http://www.frca.co.uk/article.aspx?articleid=100360 for some awesome anatomy 
pics all in one spot!  
 
1) Describe the arterial supply of the spinal cord 
See http://www.frca.co.uk/images/spinal-cord4.jpg  
 
“The arterial supply of the spinal cord is derived primarily from two sources.  
● The single anterior spinal artery arises from the paired vertebral arteries. This 
anterior spinal artery runs the entire length of the cord in the midline anterior median 
sulcus and supplies roughly the anterior two thirds of the spinal cord.  
● Blood supply to the posterior third of the spinal cord is derived from the smaller 
paired posterior spinal arteries.  
The anterior and the posterior spinal arteries receive segmental contributions from radicular 
arteries, the largest being the radicular artery of Adamkiewicz, which typically originates from 
the aorta between T8 and L4. The venous drainage of the cord largely parallels the arterial 
supply.” - Rosen’s 9th Edition, Chapter 96 
 
 
 
CrackCast Show Notes – Spinal Cord – September 2017 
www.canadiem.org/crackcast 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2) Label the spinal cord, and describe the major ascending and 
descending tracts 
 
See Rosen’s Figure 96.1 for the complete diagram. 
 
● Spinothalamic: crossing of sensory information occurs near the level of entry of the 
spinal nerve. A cord lesion affecting one lateral spinothalamic tract will lead to 
decreased pain and temperature sensation on the CONTRALATERAL side of the 
body.  
● Posterior column: crossing of sensory information occurs in the medulla  
● Corticospinal tracts: decussation occurs in the medulla  
 
 
 
 
 
CrackCast Show Notes – Spinal Cord – September 2017 
www.canadiem.org/crackcast 
 
 
 
3) List the features of transverse cord syndrome.  
 
Aka: complete cord syndrome!  
Usually in the setting of trauma (other causes: infarction, hemorrhage). If the complete 
syndrome lasts more than 24 hrs, recovery doesn’t occur.  
 
● Total loss of voluntary, distal to the injury:   
○ Motor 
■ Sphincter dysfunction 
○ Sensory (i.e. NO sacral sparing or rectal tone) 
■ Sensory loss at a clear anatomic level 
○ Autonomic innervation  
 
Reflexes still can (but not always) occur because they are mediated by the spinal levels; 
examples would be:  
● DTR’s 
● Autonomic dysfunction:  
○ Neurogenic shock 
○ Priapism  
If you have a bulbocavernosus reflex = spinal shock is over; if you don’t have a BC 
reflex the spinal injury has likely led to spinal shock.  
 
“Spinal shock refers to the loss of muscle tone and reflexes with complete cord syndrome 
during the acute phase of injury. Spinal shock typically lasts less than 24 hours but has been 
reported occasionally to last days to weeks. A marker of spinal shock is loss of the 
bulbocavernosus reflex, which is a normal cord-mediated reflex that may be preserved in 
complete cord lesions. The bulbo-cavernosus reflex involves involuntary reflex contraction of 
the anal sphincter in response to a squeeze of the glans penis or a tug on the Foley 
catheter. The termination of the spinal shock phase of injury is heralded by the return of the 
bulbocavernosus reflex; increased muscle tone and hyperreflexia follow later.” – Rosen’s  
 
 
 
 
 
 
CrackCast Show Notes – Spinal Cord – September 2017 
www.canadiem.org/crackcast 
 
 
 
4) Describe 3 common partial cord syndromes and list 3 most likely 
causes of each 
 
Central Cord syndrome 
Central contusion to grey matter and 
CS+ST tracts from hyperextension falls 
Brown-Sequard syndrome 
Hemisection of spinal cord penetrating 
trauma 
Anterior cord syndrome 
 hyperflexion/herniation/hypotension 
● 
Most common  
● 
hyperExtension injury due to 
bulging lig. Flavum  
● 
Falls, MVCs in the elderly 
with OA and stenosis   
● 
Cerv. canal narrowing: 
disc protrusion / tumour 
● 
Penetrating injury 
● 
Tumours, epidural 
hematoma, AVMs, 
spondylolysis, DDD, herpes 
zoster myelitis, radiation or 
iatrogenic spinal injury 
● 
Post-op hypotension in aortic 
surgery (injury to vertebral 
art)  
● 
Infection, MI, vasospasm 
● 
Herniated bone frag/discs  
● 
Bilateral MOTOR paresis 
● 
Upper > lower extremities 
● 
Distal muscle groups > 
proximal (anatomy!) 
● 
Sensory burning 
dysesthesias UE 
● 
+/- bladder dysfunction 
● 
Ipsilateral motor loss (CS) 
● 
Ipsilateral vib/proprioception 
loss (PC) 
● 
CONtralateral sensation of 
pain and temperature (ST)  
● 
MOST pts do not have the 
classic pattern (above); and 
have partial sensory/motor 
impairment 
● 
Loss of motor function, 
pinprick, light touch below 
the level 
● 
(preservation of posterior 
column: touch, position, 
proprioception)  
● 
Mixed motor/sensory findings 
Bladder function, and ambulation may 
not return in the elderly patient  
Good prognosis  
Often poor functional improvement  
 
 
5) Differentiate between Conus Medullaris and Cauda Equina 
Syndromes 
 
This is a difficult differentiation in clinical practice! Lots of overlap! Can get a combined 
syndrome. They both can have saddle anesthesia, both can have variable sensory loss. 
Both can have impaired sphincter control.  
 
Conus Medullaris 
~L1 level  
Cauda Equina Syndromes 
Dysfunction at the level of the NERVE ROOTs 
Weakness may be of an upper motor neuron 
type (increased motor tone, abnormal 
reflexes)  
- 
Usually bilateral symptoms**  
Weakness may be of a lower motor neuron 
type (flaccid, decreased reflexes)  
 
- 
Usually unilateral symptoms 
Causes:  
● 
Central disc herniation  
● 
Neoplasm 
● 
Trauma 
● 
Vascular insufficiency  
Causes:  
● 
Midline rupture of an intervertebral 
disk (L4-L5)  
● 
Tumours  
fecal/overflow urinary incontinence 
Impotence, distal motor weakness, sensory 
loss in a saddle distribution  
fecal/overflow urinary incontinence 
Impotence, distal motor weakness, sensory 
loss in a saddle distribution.   
Urinary retention is the most consistent finding 
(>90%).  
 
 
 
CrackCast Show Notes – Spinal Cord – September 2017 
www.canadiem.org/crackcast 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6) List 10 causes of non-traumatic spinal cord dysfunction (6 intrinsic / 
4 extrinsic) 
 
Ok, so you did your diagnostic sleuthing - brain vs. spinal cord vs. motor end-plate.  
 
You think it’s the spinal cord, now you have to figure out which process is behind the spinal 
cord dysfunction. It’s generally broken down into:  
 
● Primary (intrinsic cord disease - demyelination, infection, infarction)  
● Secondary (compression of the cord, originating outside the dura) 
 
Another term to know: Myelitis = spinal cord inflammation with dysfunction. The causes of 
myelitis are LEGION - think of it like saying a joint has “arthritis”  
 
So here’s the list: (See Box 96.1 in Rosen’s for original table) 
 
Nontraumatic Causes of Spinal Cord Dysfunction 
• 
Intrinsic: inflammatory - infectious - infarction  
• 
PROCESSES AFFECTING THE SPINAL CORD OR BLOOD SUPPLY DIRECTLY 
o MS 
o Transverse myelitis 
o Spinal arteriovenous malformation, subarachnoid hemorrhage 
o Syringomyelia 
o HIV myelopathy 
o Other myelopathies 
o Spinal cord infarction 
 
• 
Extrinsic: infection - cancer (infiltration) - vascular  
• 
COMPRESSIVE LESIONS AFFECTING THE SPINAL CORD 
o Spinal epidural hematoma 
o SEA 
o Diskitis 
o Neoplasm 
o Metastatic 
o Primary CNS 
 
 
Workup:  
● CT for trauma, or bone involvement 
● MRI is crucial for inflammation, edema, infection, hemorrhage.  
○ Gadolinium enhancement increases sensitivity  
● LP is the next step (after imaging has rule out compressive/mass lesions) 
○ To look for inflammatory or demyelinating disorders  
 
 
 
 
 
CrackCast Show Notes – Spinal Cord – September 2017 
www.canadiem.org/crackcast 
 
 
 
7) Describe the clinical features + management of each: 
 
Spinal assessment:  
● Key general history taking to figure out onset (rapid = likely vascular vs. slow = 
infectious); trauma history, cancer history, etc.  
● Physical exam:  
○ Motor: bulk, tone, strength, BC reflex, post-void residual  
○ Sensory:  
■ Light touch and pinprick - contralateral spinothalamic tract 
■ proprioception/vibration - ipsilateral posterior column 
■ Sacral dermatomal testing  
○ Reflexes: 
■ 0 -  4+ for DTR’s 
● Can be absent in an UMN if sensory function is lost or spinal 
shock exists.  
■ Clonus 
■ Babinski’s sign  
● Things that may mimic spinal cord dysfunction but are easily treatable! 
○ Hypoglycemia 
○ hypokalemia 
 
a) Transverse Myelitis 
o Heterogenous group of inflammatory disorders that disturb 
ascending/descending pathways in the spinal cord (compressive lesions, 
trauma, infection, malignant infiltration). Commonly (30%) post-viral infectious 
myelitis. May also be infectious, autoimmune (lupus, sjogren’s, MCD).  
o Usually the thoracic cord affected.  
o Clinical features:  
▪ 
Rapid progressive neuro deficits - maximally in 24 hrs or may take 
days/weeks.  
▪ 
Back pain; low grade fever (SEA).  
▪ 
Paraplegia, transverse level of sensory impairment, sphincter 
disturbance 
• 
May have paresis, hypertonia, hypereflexia, clonus, positive 
Babinski’s 
• 
ANS dysfunction  
o Diagnosis: MRI with gadolinium enhancement; CSF often normal.  
o Management:  
▪ 
Treat the underlying cause 
▪ 
No role for steroids  
▪ 
Hospitalization - consult neurosurgery/neurology 
 
b) Spinal SAH 
o See diagram at: http://www.frca.co.uk/images/spinal-cord3.gif  
o Rare disease. May occur in the epidural, subdural, subarachnoid, 
intramedullary layers.  
 
 
 
CrackCast Show Notes – Spinal Cord – September 2017 
www.canadiem.org/crackcast 
 
 
 
o USUALLY caused by an AV malformation. Can also occur from tumours, 
cavernous angiomas, spontaneously in anticoagulated pts.  
o Clinical features:  
▪ 
Thunderclap, excruciating back pain. May extending into flank/radiate.  
▪ 
May have h/a and neck stiffness.  
▪ 
Neuro deficits vary:  
• 
Numbness, weakness, sphincter dysfunction.  
o Diagnosis: MRI without contrast; LP can confirm the dx.  
o Management:  
▪ 
Reverse any anticoagulation 
▪ 
Treat the underlying cause 
▪ 
Consult neurosurgery  
 
c) Syringomyelia (aka syrinx) 
o Cavitary lesion in the substance of the spinal cord. 90% of these patients 
have a Chiari I malformation. May also occur post spinal trauma or after 
meningitis.  
o  Clinical features:  
▪ 
h/a, neck pain, sensory changes (cape like), gait disorder, low cranial 
nerve dysfunction  
▪ 
Symptoms worsen with increasing ICP 
▪ 
Lower limb hyperreflexia, weakness/wasting of hands/arms, 
dissociated sensory loss (Post Column preservation of proprioception 
and light touch), ataxia  
o Diagnosis: MRI 
o Management: Follow-up evaluation usually adequate; NO ER treatment 
usually needed.  
 
8) What are 4 causes of spinal cord infarction? And what is the 
common cord syndrome? 
 
● Aortic dissection 
● Post spinal cord/aortic arch surgery 
● Global ischemic states 
● Systemic lupus 
● Vasculitis 
● Cryptogenic  
 
Presents with an anterior spinal cord syndrome. Proprioception, vibration and light touch 
usually preserved (posterior column).  
 
9) List 5 RFs for spinal epidural abscess. And list 4 common bacteria 
implication in epidural abscess 
 
Risk factors:  
● Diabetes 
 
 
 
CrackCast Show Notes – Spinal Cord – September 2017 
www.canadiem.org/crackcast 
 
 
 
● Injection drug use 
● Chronic renal failure 
● Alcoholism  
● Immunosuppression  
● Recent infection  
 
Usually the infection is spread from a hematogenous source → either epidural space or 
vertebra with extension to the epidural space. Other common sources: SSTI’s 
 
Common bacteria:  
● Staphylococcus aureus (>50%) 
● Aerobic and anaerobic streptococci 
● E. Coli 
● Pseudomonas aeruginosa  
 
Clinical features:  
● Backache with tenderness to percussion  
○ Usually days to weeks of pain 
● Fever, sweats, rigors 
● Progressive neuro deficits including bowel/bladder disturbance.  
● Paraplegia and delirium are late findings 
 
10) List 4 causes of spinal epidural hematoma 
 
● Post trauma 
○ LP 
○ Epidural anesthesia 
○ Spinal surgery 
● Coagulopathic 
○ Anticoagulated 
○ Thrombocytopenia 
○ Liver dz or alcoholism 
● Spontaneous 
○ Spinal or dural AVM 
○ Vertebral hemangioma  
 
Almost everyone needs a decompressive laminectomy.  
 
11) List 4 possible investigations for spinal epidural abscess and 
diskitis. What are the expected findings? 
 
● MRI with IV contrast: Enhancement  
● CBC: WBC is insensitive and nonspecific. May be elevated @ 13-16000 / uL 
● ESR/CRP: Not specific, but 100% sensitive if elevated.  
● Lumbar spine xray:  
 
 
 
CrackCast Show Notes – Spinal Cord – September 2017 
www.canadiem.org/crackcast 
 
 
 
○ Destruction of the lumbar disc space (diskitis) usually after 2-4 weeks of 
disease  
○ Disc space narrowing 
○ Loss of vertebral body endplates 
 
Notice these are NOT in the list:  
● CT scan (bone artifact!)  
● LP (relatively contraindicated: but would show elevated protein and inflammation)  
 
12) How does the treatment of diskitis differ from epidural abscess 
(SEA)? 
 
SEA:  
“Management: Urgent surgical consultation for decompression usually is required. Antibiotics 
effective against the most common pathogens (particularly S. aureus) should be started 
empirically. One possible regimen that covers gram-positive and gram-negative organisms 
consists of a third-generation cephalosporin (ceftriaxone 2000 mg every 24 hours) plus 
vancomycin (15 to 20 mg/kg IV every 8 to 12 hours), both given intravenously, plus rifampin 
(10 mg/kg by mouth or IV once a day).” - Rosen’s 9th Edition, Chapter 96 
 
Diskitis:  
● Surgery is usually NOT needed 
● Broad spectrum abx:  
○ Vancomycin 10-15 mg/kg IV 
○ Ceftriaxone 2 g IV 
 
13) Describe clinical presentation of spinal neoplasm, investigations 
and management. 
 
● Usually metastatic tumours from breast, lung, lymphoma  
○ Thoracic sites most common 
● Clinical features:  
○ Back pain 
■ Worse with recumbency  
■ WORSE at night 
■ Worse with valsalva, sneezing  
○ Neuro deficits depending on the site.  
● Investigations:  
○ Normal plain radiograph and ESR <20 = very unlikely cancer 
○ MRI with IV contrast 
○ CT myelography  
● Management: 
○ This is an area where steroids may recommended for cases of acute spinal 
cord compression syndromes.  
○ Radiation treatment is recommended for cord compression by tumours.  
○ Surgery  
 
 
 
CrackCast Show Notes – Spinal Cord – September 2017 
www.canadiem.org/crackcast 
 
 
 
Wisecracks  
1) Quick recap of spinal cord syndromes  
Please see Rosen’s Figure 96.1 to see the full diagram 
 
SYNDROME 
SENSORY 
MOTOR 
SPHINCTER 
INVOLVEMENT 
CENTRAL 
CORD 
Variable 
Upper extremity weakness, 
distal > proximal 
Variable 
BROWN-
SÉQUARD 
Ipsilateral position and 
vibration sense loss 
Contralateral pain and 
temperature sensation 
loss 
Motor loss ipsilateral to cord 
lesion 
Variable 
ANTERIOR 
CORD 
Loss of pin and touch 
sensations 
Vibration, position 
sense preserved 
Motor loss or weakness 
below cord level 
Variable 
TRANSVERSE 
CORD 
(COMPLETE) 
Loss of sensation 
below level of cord 
injury 
Loss of voluntary motor 
function below cord level 
Sphincter 
control lost 
CONUS 
MEDULARIS 
Saddle anaesthesia 
may be present, or 
sensory loss may 
range from patchy to 
complete transverse 
pattern 
Weakness may be of upper 
motor neuron type 
Sphincter 
control impaired 
CAUDA EQUINA 
Saddle anaesthesia 
may be present, or 
sensory loss may 
range from patchy to 
complete transverse 
pattern 
Weakness may be of lower 
motor neuron type 
Sphincter 
control impaired 
 
2) Immunocompromised Myelopathy DDx:  
● HIV myelopathy 
● Toxoplasmosis 
● Lymphoma 
● VZV infection 
● CMV infection  
