# Metadata
- topic: 3.11 - Metabolism and Endocrinology - CC-Ep-127-Rhabdomyolysis--119-Rosens-9th-Ed.-
- source_folder: 3.11 - Metabolism and Endocrinology
- original_file: CC-Ep-127-Rhabdomyolysis-Ch.-119-Rosens-9th-Ed.-.pdf

 
 
 
 
 
CrackCast Show Notes – Rhabdomyolysis – November 2017  
www.canadiem.org/crackcast 
 
 
Chapter 119 – Rhabdomyolysis 
 
Episode overview 
1. List the pathophysiology of rhabdomyolysis  
2. List 8 causes of Rhabdomyolysis 
3. List 6 metabolic derangements associated with Rhabdomyolysis 
4. List 5 causes of pigmenturia 
5. List 4 treatments of Rhabdomyolysis 
 
Wisecracks 
1) What is the pathophysiology of pigment nephropathy? 
2) How is pigment nephropathy in the setting of rhabdomyolysis managed? 
 
 
Rosen’s In Perspective: 
Rhabdomyolysis is a potentially life-threatening condition characterized by the breakdown of 
skeletal muscle and the release into the circulatory system of intracellular contents, including 
creatine kinase, aspartate transaminase, lactate dehydrogenase, aldolase, 
the heme pigment myoglobin, and electrolytes. - Rosen’s 9th Edition, Chapter 119 
 
Core questions 
 
1) List the pathophysiology of rhabdomyolysis  
 
Muscle cells have delicate Na-K-Ca balances to work properly. ATP is the prime fuel to keep 
calcium - which is toxic to muscle cells - outside the cell.  
 
Rhabdomyolysis occurs after a final common pathway—increased cytoplasmic calcium 
concentration, leading to myocyte destruction, with the release of muscle components into the 
circulation. There are two primary mechanisms whereby calcium pathologically 
accumulates in the cell, (1) direct cell membrane damage and (2) ATP depletion. 
• Membrane damage from trauma and genetic or biochemical factors results in a massive 
influx of extracellular calcium into the cytoplasm driven by electrical and chemical gradients.  
• ATP depletion results in failure of cellular transport and increased permeability to sodium 
ions. 
 
Sequence of events:  
Increased cytoplasmic Ca++ → mitochondria get overwhelmed with calcium causing:  
1. Triggered apoptosis 
 
 
 
 
 
CrackCast Show Notes – Rhabdomyolysis – November 2017  
www.canadiem.org/crackcast 
 
 
2. Disruption of oxidative phosphorylation → further increasing intracellular Ca++ because 
of no ATP production  
3. Escalating production of free radicals  
4. Destruction of lipids, proteins, DNA, → DESTRUCTION OF MYOCYTES  
 
Rhabdomyolysis results in muscle cell breakdown, with the release of toxic contents into 
the extracellular space and damage to adjacent capillaries, resulting in local edema, 
increased compartmental pressures, and regional ischemia, which further induces energy 
depletion and destroys more capillaries. 
 
See Rosen’s Fig 119.2 for a diagram of the pathophysiology. 
 
2) List 8 causes of Rhabdomyolysis 
 
Rhabdomyolysis is classified into four basic pathophysiologic processes: 
1. Impairment of the muscle’s production or use of ATP at the cellular level. ATP 
concentrations within the cell fall; energy-dependent mechanisms falter, including Na+,K+, 
ATPase pumps, leading to disruption of chemical gradients, sarcolemma and cell membrane 
compromise, and cell destruction. 
2. Disruption in the delivery of oxygen, glucose, and other nutrients to skeletal muscle 
3. Increases in metabolic demands beyond the ability of the organism to deliver oxygen and 
nutrients 
4. Direct myocyte damage 
- Rosen’s 9th Edition, Chapter 119 
 
Causes of rhabdomyolysis:  
• 
Prolonged immobilization  
• 
Excessive muscle activity (can be high or low intensity!)  
• 
Muscle ischemia (Rhabdo occurs after reperfusion!)  
o arterial occlusion, carbon monoxide poisoning, and external compression.  
§ 
Muscle cell hypoxia leads to muscle damage in as little as 2 hours, with 
irreversible anatomic and functional changes within 4 hours and muscle 
necrosis in as little as 6 hours. 
• 
Temperature extremes  
o A core body temperature of 42°C (107.6° F) for more than 45 to 60 minutes leads 
to cellular damage.  
o Heat stroke, neuroleptic malignant syndrome, and malignant hyperthermia 
o hypothermia causes sarcolemma membrane dysfunction -  e.g. post-cardiac 
arrest cooling  
• 
Electrical current  
o High-voltage electrical injury, including lighting, poses the highest risk. 
 
 
 
 
 
CrackCast Show Notes – Rhabdomyolysis – November 2017  
www.canadiem.org/crackcast 
 
 
o Post-repeated cardioversion  
• 
Electrolyte abnormalities  
o hypoK+ 
o hypoPhos 
o HypoNa+ / HyperNa+ 
• 
Illicit drugs  
o opioids, antipsychotics, benzodiazepines, amphetamines, ecstasy, LSD, and 
synthetic cannabinoids 
o Due to: immobilization with muscle tissue hypoperfusion and hypoxia, 
psychomotor agitation, direct myotoxicity, and electrolyte abnormalities, 
particularly hypokalemia and hypophosphatemia. 
• 
Medications 
o Statins 
o Antipsychotics  
• 
Infections  
o Any infection 
o Most common: Sepsis (esp due to legionella), influenza A.  
• 
Metabolic myopathies 
o Inborn errors of metabolism - appear in children  
• 
Connective tissue disorders 
o polymyositis, dermatomyositis, and Sjögren’s syndrome. 
• 
Rheumatologic disorders - SLE 
• 
Endocrine disorders - hypothyroidism  
• 
Biologic toxins 
o Snakebite, Africanized bees, wasps and honey bee envenomations are known to 
release myotoxic agents causing rhabdomyolysis. 
• 
Other + unknown  
o Post-succinylcholine, post caffeine overdose, and others!  
 
 
Simpler mnemonic for causes of rhabdomyolysis: "Dead MUSCLE"  
• 
Drug use 
• 
Medications - Rx 
• 
Unconscious - muscle compression 
• 
Snake bites 
• 
Convulsions - seizures, overexertion  
• 
L 
• 
Electrocution 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CrackCast Show Notes – Rhabdomyolysis – November 2017  
www.canadiem.org/crackcast 
 
 
3) List 6 metabolic derangements associated with Rhabdomyolysis 
● Hyperkalemia 
○ 98% of potassium is intracellular  
○ Necrosis of 100g of muscle can lead to serum potassium increase of 1 mmol/L  
● Metabolic acidosis 
○ Dehydration, myoglobin induced kidney dysfunction 
○ Metabolic acidosis is also induced by the release of organic acids (eg, lactic acid, 
uric acid, sulfur-containing proteins). 
● Hyperphosphatemia 
○ From muscle cell destruction  
● Early hypocalcemia (calcium phosphate crystal deposition in the muscle cells)  
○ → late hypercalcemia  (as the cytoplasm of necrotic muscle cells gets extruded 
into the circulation)  
● Hyperuricemia  
● Hypoalbuminemia  
● Anemia  
● Hypovolemia  
○ Fluid moves from intravascular compartments into damaged muscle, causing 
profound intravascular volume depletion. This shift may exceed 15 L. 
● Hepatic dysfunction:  
○ The cause of this finding is not fully understood, but proteases released by 
muscle cells have been implicated. However, aspartate transaminase level 
elevations may also be of skeletal muscle origin. 
 
4) List 5 causes of pigmenturia 
When serum myoglobin concentrations exceed 0.3 mg/L and the renal threshold of 1.0 mg/dL is 
met, this reabsorptive capacity is overwhelmed, and excess myoglobin appears in the urine. 
This myoglobin is detected by urine dipstick as positive for blood. - Rosen’s 9th Edition, 
Chapter 117 However, on urine microscopy - few if any red blood cells will appear  
 
[See Rosen’s Table 119.1 for full details] 
Cause 
Results for 
blood in urine 
Sediment 
Supernatant 
Hematuria 
+++ 
Red 
Yellow 
Myoglobinuria 
+++ 
Normal 
Red to brown 
Hemoglobinuria 
+++ 
Normal 
Red to brown 
Porphyria 
- 
Normal 
Red 
Bile pigments 
- 
Normal 
Brown 
Food and drugs 
- 
Normal 
Red to brown 
Foods and drugs that can cause red urine include beets, blackberries, rhubarb, food colouring, 
fava beans, phenolphthalein, nifampin, doxorubicin, deferoxamine, chloroquine, ibuprofen and 
methyldopa 
 
 
 
 
 
CrackCast Show Notes – Rhabdomyolysis – November 2017  
www.canadiem.org/crackcast 
 
 
Because it is only detectable early in the course of disease, the absence of plasma or urine 
myoglobin does not rule out rhabdomyolysis (peaks in the first 12 hrs).  
 
Note that the differential diagnosis of blood positive urine dipstick excludes: porphyria, bile 
pigments, and food/drug causes.  
 
5) List 4 treatments of Rhabdomyolysis 
 
Management of rhabdomyolysis focuses on treatment of the cause, prevention of renal failure, 
and management of life- or limb-threatening complications. 
 
Four treatments:  
1. Fluid replacement / resuscitation 
a. If using normal saline - watch for hyperchloremic metabolic acidosis 
b. Lactated ringers may be more physiologic in large volumes  
c. IV fluid administration should be continued until the plasma CK concentration 
decreases to less than 1000 U/L. A total of 10 to 20 L of IV fluid is often 
administered in the first 24 hours, depending on the severity of illness and 
underlying comorbidities 
d. Goal is at least 300 ml/hr of urine output in the average adult 
2. Urinary alkalinization - urine pH goal > 6.5 { NOT a proven therapy} 
a. alkalinization inhibits redox cycling of myoglobin and lipid peroxidation. However, 
the clinical benefits of alkalinization compared with simple saline volume 
repletion are not firmly established, and sodium bicarbonate therapy has not 
been proven necessary or superior to normal saline diuresis at increasing urine 
pH. 
3. Mannitol:  {NOT a proven therapy} 
a. Shown to be helpful in animal studies 
b. In human studies, the addition of mannitol has not been shown to be more 
beneficial than fluid expansion alone, and no randomized controlled trials have 
shown any beneficial effect. 
c. Do NOT use: 
i. 
Lasix 
ii. 
Acetazolamide 
4. Continuous renal replacement therapy  
a. indications for emergent dialysis or filtration remain uncorrectable metabolic 
acidosis, life-threatening hyperkalemia and other electrolyte disturbances despite 
medical management, manifestations of uremia, and anuria or oliguria, despite 
volume expansion with complications related to fluid overload. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CrackCast Show Notes – Rhabdomyolysis – November 2017  
www.canadiem.org/crackcast 
 
 
 
Rhabdomyolysis, when recognized and treated early, carries an excellent prognosis. With the 
exception of hyperkalemia-related death or the rare complication of DIC, acute kidney injury is 
the most serious complication of rhabdomyolysis, regardless of cause. - Rosen’s 9th Edition, 
Chapter 119 
 
The definitive diagnosis of rhabdomyolysis is reliably made by serologic testing for creatine 
kinase (CK). This test can assist the clinician in assessing at-risk patients when historical and 
examination findings are lacking. Elevated levels of CK are the hallmark of rhabdomyolysis.  
 
CK has a half-life of 1.5 days; its level elevated in the first 12 hours, peaks during the first 3 
days, and normalizes at around 5 days after injury.  
 
A CK level five times the upper limit of normal (≈1000 U/L), without apparent cardiac or brain 
injury, confirms the diagnosis. 
 
Wisecracks 
 
1) What is the pathophysiology of pigment nephropathy? 
Myoglobin is a dark red protein composed of globin and a molecule of heme. Its normal function 
is to supply oxygen to skeletal and cardiac muscle in times of need (it stores oxygen in the 
muscle cells). The excretion of myoglobin occurs renally. - Rosen’s 9th Edition, Chapter 119 
 
The pathophysiologic process of myoglobinuric acute kidney injury are:  
1. myoglobin cast formation in the distal convoluted tubules (in an acidic environment, 
myoglobin precipitates with uric acid to form obstructive casts) 
2. Direct cytotoxic action of myoglobin on the epithelial cells of the proximal convoluted 
tubules 
a. Myoglobin itself has been shown to exhibit peroxidase-like enzyme activity. 
Ferrihemate causes direct nephrotoxic effects along with the resultant increased 
oxidative stress within the tubular epithelial cell, leading to acute tubular 
necrosis through lipid, protein, and DNA peroxidation. 
3. intrarenal vasoconstriction and ischemia (dehydration)  
a. Fluid shifts and renal dysfunction lead to activation of the renin-angiotensin-
aldosterone system and sympathetic nervous system and production of 
vasoconstricting molecules such as endothelin 1 and vasopressin. There is also 
decreased production of vasodilatory prostaglandins. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CrackCast Show Notes – Rhabdomyolysis – November 2017  
www.canadiem.org/crackcast 
 
 
 
2) How is pigment nephropathy in the setting of rhabdomyolysis 
managed? 
 
The CK level should be used as a diagnostic marker for rhabdomyolysis and not as a 
prognostic indicator of acute renal injury.  
 
Once the diagnosis is made, the eGFR can be used to predict renal injury and determine the 
need for admission; 
 
Management of rhabdomyolysis focuses on treatment of the cause, prevention of renal failure, 
and management of life- or limb-threatening complications. - Rosen’s 9th Edition, Chapter 119 
 
