# Metadata
- topic: 3.7 - Neurology - CC-EP102-Seizure-Chpt-92-in-Rosens-9th-edition
- source_folder: 3.7 - Neurology
- original_file: CC-EP102-Seizure-Chpt-92-in-Rosens-9th-edition.pdf

Crack Cast Show Notes – Seizures – August 2017 
www.canadiem.org 
 
 
                              
 
Chapter 102 – Seizures  
Episode Overview 
 
1. Define status epilepticus 
2. List 10 Causes of status epilepticus 
3. List the differential diagnosis of ALOC post seizure 
4. What factors predict abnormal CT findings in seizure patients? 
5. Describe the 1st, 2nd and third line management options for seizure 
6. List 4 antidotes for specific causes of refractory seizure 
7. List 5 regular anti convulsants that can be re-initiated in the emergency department 
8. List the acute Complications of seizures 
9. Describe the legal implications of diagnosis of new seizure 
 
WiseCracks 
 
1. Contrast Seizure vs Syncope 
2. Review differential diagnosis of seizure 
3. What is neurogenic pulmonary edema and how does it occur? 
4. Seizure meds and dose for no IV access 
5. What is a psychogenic non-epileptic seizure? 
 
 
 
 
Rosens in Perspective 
 
As an ER doc you will see seizures! 
 
Bimodal age distribution with vast majority being in infants (febrile seizures) and the elderly over 
age 75 (structural brain abnormalities) 
 
For neurons to work properly, we need a balance milieu inside and out of the cell membrane. 
This includes the balance between excitatory neurotransmitters (think glutamate and 
acetylcholine) and inhibitory neurotransmitters (think GABA).  
 
So things like infection, Infection, toxins, electrolyte imbalances, and other pathologic processes 
come around, we get badness. Once a mini electrical storm starts to happen, surrounding 
neurons start to become recruited in the chaos. If this happens in the motor cortex, we get the 
typical Jacksonian March, when focal motor seizure symptoms spread in a step-wise fashion.  
 
If we start recruiting deeper brain centers - ie the reticular activating system, then we alter our 
mentation. 
 
 
Crack Cast Show Notes – Seizures – August 2017 
www.canadiem.org 
 
 
                              
 
Some important definitions: 
 
❏ Seizure: “excessive abnormal neuron activity associated with alterations in sensory, 
motor, autonomic, and/or cognitive function.” 
❏ Convulsion: “refers specifically to the motor manifestations of a seizure” 
❏ ictal Period: “is the time during which a seizure or seizure-like activity occurs.” 
❏ Post-ictal period: “A postictal period is an interval of altered mental status immediately 
following a seizure, generally lasting less than 1 hour.” 
❏ Epilepsy: “Epilepsy refers to a condition of recurrent unprovoked seizures.” 
 
Seizures can be partial (focal) or generalized 
 
❏ Partial seizure: “involve abnormal neuronal  firing within a confined population of 
neurons in one brain hemisphere, and the clinical manifestations tend to reflect the area 
of electrical activity. 
❏ Generalized: “Generalized seizure denotes abnormal neuronal  ring throughout both 
brain hemispheres and always involves alterations of consciousness. Secondarily 
generalized seizures start as a focal seizure and then progresses to a generalized 
event.” 
 
Simple vs Complex seizure reflects whether the patient is fully aware and mentating (simple) 
versus ALOC or altered mentation (complex) 
 
Partial subtypes: 
 
● Motor (eg. facial twitching or rhythmic ipsilateral extremity movements) 
● Autonomic( eg tachycardia or diaphoresis) 
● Somatosensory (eg tingling or perceiving a certain smell) 
● Psychic (eg déjà-vu).  
 
Note: Psychic and somatosensory are usually classified as auras. 
 
Generalized subtypes: 
 
● Absence 
● tonic (stiffening) 
● clonic (rhythmic jerking) 
● Tonic-clonic 
● Myoclonic (discrete violent muscle contractions), 
● atonic (loss of muscle tone).  
 
Note: The common term grand mal seizure refers to generalized tonic-clonic seizures 
See Figure 92.1 for a simplified classification of seizures.  
What is Todd’s Paralysis 
Crack Cast Show Notes – Seizures – August 2017 
www.canadiem.org 
 
 
                              
 
● Focal motor deficit (eg complete hemiplegia) after seizure 
● Can last up to 24 hrs 
● Caused by focal cerebral hypoperfusion 
● Associated with high likelihood for underlying structural abnormality 
 
 
 
[1]  Define status epilepticus: 
 
Status Epilepticus:  
 
A. Seizure lasting longer than greater than 5 minutes duration, or  
B. recurrent seizure activity without intervening return to baseline mental status 
 
Status epilepticus is divided into two basic categories:  
● Generalized convulsive status epilepticus (GCSE)  
● Non-convulsive status epilepticus (NCSE).  
 
GCSE: MEDICAL EMERGENCY 
● typically tonic-clonic seizures 
● Mortality correlated directly to seizure event 
 
NCSE:  can be subtle presentation 
● Think about in patients with alteration in mentation (coma to subtle motor signs, such as 
twitching, blinking, eye deviation, persistent aphasia, or somatosensory aura) 
● EEG will show epileptiform discharges 
 
 
REFRACTORY STATUS EPILEPTICUS = a seizure that does not terminate after treatment with 
a benzo plus second antiepileptic drug.  
 
[2]  List 10 Causes of status epilepticus 
• 
See Box 92.1 in Rosens 9th Edition 
• 
Broken down by: 
o Metabolic 
o Infectious 
o Withdrawal syndromes 
o CNS lesions 
o Intoxication 
 
 
 
 
 
Crack Cast Show Notes – Seizures – August 2017 
www.canadiem.org 
 
 
                              
 
[3]  List the differential diagnosis of ALOC post seizure 
See Box 92.2 – Differential Diagnosis of AMS in Patient Who Has Seized 
Post-ictal Period 
• 
NCSE or subtle convulsive status epilepticus can mimic 
o Hypoglycemia 
o CNS infection 
o CNS vascular event 
o Drug toxicity 
o Psychiatric disorder 
o Metabolic encephalopathy 
o Migraine 
o Transient global amnesia 
 
[4]  What factors predict abnormal CT findings in seizure patients? 
See Box 92.3 – Differential Diagnosis of AMS in Patient Who Has Seized 
• 
Focal abnormality on neurological examination 
• 
Malignancy 
• 
Closed head injury 
• 
Neurocutaneous disorder 
• 
Focal onset of seizure 
• 
Absence of a history of alcohol abuse 
• 
History of cysticercosis 
• 
Altered mental status 
• 
Patient older than 65 years old 
• 
Seizure duration more than 15 minutes 
 
[5] Describe the 1st, 2nd and third line management options for seizure 
See table 15.1 in 9th Edition of Rosens – Seizure chapter 
In summary, they discuss abortive options for seizure, with dosing and precautions, particularly: 
• 
Initial therapy of either: 
o Diazepam 
o Lorazepam 
o Midazolam 
• 
Second tier treatments of either: 
o Phenytoin 
o Fosphenytoin 
o Valproic acid 
o Levetiracetam 
• 
Third-tier treatments 
o Pentobarbital 
o Phenobarbital 
o Midazolam infusion 
o Propofol infusion 
Crack Cast Show Notes – Seizures – August 2017 
www.canadiem.org 
 
 
                              
 
 
[6] List 4 antidotes for specific causes of refractory seizure 
Table 92.1 in Rosens 
Management of Special Situation Seizures in the ED 
 
Clinical Situation 
Agent of Choice 
Dosage/Comment 
Hyponatremia 
Hypertonic saline 
2-3ml/kg of 3% NaCl in rapid sequential boluses until 
seizures stop 
Hypocalcemia 
CaCl or gluconate 
Sequential ampules until seizures stop 
TCA overdose 
Alkalization 
Administer 0.5 to 1.0 mEq/kg IV bolus; repeat as 
needed to maintain a blood pH of 7.4 to 7.5  
Salicylate overdose 
Alkalization; hemodialysis 
for severe cases 
Administer 0.5 to 1.0 mEq/kg IV bolus; repeat as 
needed to maintain a blood pH of 7.4 to 7.5 
Isoniazid overdose 
Pyridoxine 
5g IV (adult) or 70mg/kg (pediatric) 
Cocaine intoxication 
Benzodiazepines 
As per idiopathic seizures 
Lithium toxicity 
Hemodialysis 
 
Alcohol-associated 
Lorazepam 
0.05-0.10mg/kg 
MDMA 
Benzodiazepines 
Be aware of possible hyperthermia or hyponatremia 
Eclampsia 
Magnesium 
IV loading dose of 4-6g over 15-20 minutes then 1-
2g/h infusion; monitor patients for hyporeflexia. 
Alternatively, Ativan 4mg IV over 2-5 min or Valium 5-
10mg IV slowly until seizure controlled, after which 
magnesium sulfate is administered. 
 
 
 
[7] List 5 regular anti-convulsants that can be re-initiated in the emergency 
department 
See table 92.2 in 9th Edition of Rosens 
• 
Carbemazepine 
• 
Gabapentin 
• 
Lacosamide 
• 
Lamotrigine 
• 
Levetiracetam 
• 
Fosphenytoin 
• 
Valproate 
 
 
[8] List the acute complications of seizures 
 
● Hypoglycemia 
● neurogenic pulmonary edema 
● skeletal muscle damage 
● Rhabdomyolysis 
● Autonomic discharge & bulbar muscle involvement may result in 
○  urinary or fecal incontinence 
○ Vomiting 
Crack Cast Show Notes – Seizures – August 2017 
www.canadiem.org 
 
 
                              
 
○ tongue biting 
○ potential airway impairment.  
● Posterior shoulder dislocations or fractures 
 
[9]  Describe the legal implications of diagnosis of new seizure 
 
According to the Government of British Columbia here 
 
New onset seizure has a private driving restriction: 
● with a seizure free period up to 6 months; Or 
● Medical clearance to drive by a Neurologist 
 
Professional Drivers must be: 
● Seizure free without medications for 12 months; Or 
● On medications and seizure free for 5 years 
 
 
See your local government guidelines for more information 
 
 
 
Wisecracks 
 
1. Contrast Seizure vs Syncope: 
 
Likely seizure if: 
❏ Tonic phase preceding tonic-clonic activity 
❏ Vigorous tonic-clonic movements 
❏ Retrograde amnesia 
❏ post -ictal period 
❏ Urinary incontinence 
❏ Tongue biting 
❏ Lactic acidosis 
❏ Prolactinemia 
 
 
2. Review differential diagnosis of seizure 
 
Throw back to episode 18!!! 
 
Critical Diagnosis 
• 
Status epilepticus 
• 
Non-convulsive status epilepticus 
• 
Seizures with specialized treatments: 
Crack Cast Show Notes – Seizures – August 2017 
www.canadiem.org 
 
 
                              
 
o Eclampsia 
o Toxic ingestion 
o Hypoglycemia 
o Hyponatriemia 
o Increased ICP 
 
Emergent Diagnosis 
• 
Infection 
• 
Post-traumatic seizures 
• 
Serious mimics of seizure activity (eg. Cardiogenic syncope) 
 
 
 
[3] What is neurogenic pulmonary edema and how does it occur? 
 
According to LITFL here 
 
Neurogenic pulmonary edema = clinical syndrome characterized by the acute onset of 
pulmonary edema after significant central nervous system (CNS) insult 
• 
Etiology = surge of catecholamines that results in cardiopulmonary dysfunction 
 
 
“Several theories have been proposed to explain how the catecholamine surge causes 
pulmonary edema: 
❏ Neuro-cardiac (direct myocardial injury) 
❏ Neuro-hemodynamic (ventricular compliance is indirectly altered by the abrupt increases 
in systemic and pulmonary pressures following CNS injury) 
❏ “Blast theory” (acute (transient) rise in capillary pressure induces a degree of 
barotrauma capable of damaging the capillary-alveolar membrane, in addition to neuro-
hemodynamic effects causing transudative pulmonary edema) 
❏ Pulmonary venule adrenergic hypersensitivity (massive sympathetic discharge following 
CNS injury directly affects the pulmonary vascular bed, and that the edema develops 
regardless of any systemic changes)” 
 
 
Two clinical types: 
 
❏ Early = minutes to hours after CNS insult 
❏ Delayed = 12 to 24 hours after CNS insult 
 
Management: 
 
❏ Supportive care 
❏ protective lung ventilation strategy with relative high PEP 
Crack Cast Show Notes – Seizures – August 2017 
www.canadiem.org 
 
 
                              
 
❏ alpha-blockers (phentolamine and phenoxybenzamine) -> no high quality evidence 
available 
❏ *** avoid excessive diuresis -> need to maintain systemic perfusion and cerebral blood 
flow 
❏ treat underlying CNS insult (e.g. ICP control) 
 
[4] Pediatric seizure medications and dosage for no IV access 
 
No IV… well get an IO. Dose is the same. If no IO, then go: 
● Midazolam 0.2mg/kg IM/IN/buccal 
● Diazepam 0.5mg/kg PR 
● Lorazepam 0.1mg/kg IM 
 
 
[5] What is a psychogenic non-epileptic seizure? 
 
“Psychogenic seizures (also known as pseudoseizures or nonepileptic seizures) have been 
reported in 12% to 18% of patients with transient loss of consciousness and can exist 
concomitantly with neurogenic seizures. Psychogenic seizures are rarely caused by malingering 
but instead are more commonly a functional neurological symptom disorder, formerly called a 
conversion disorder.” 
 
 Characteristic features:  
● out-of- phase tonic-clonic activity  
● forward pelvic thrusting 
● voluntary eye movements away from the examiner 
 
Bust out that optokinetic drum app!!! 
 
 
Watch out for other causes of Nonepileptic attacks (AKA nonepileptic spells) 
 
“... these are nonepileptic paroxysmal neurologic events that may resemble seizures in 
appearance but do not result from abnormal cortical discharge.”  
 
Etiologies include  
● Breath-holding spells 
● Involuntary movements 
● Decerebrate or decorticate posturing 
● Psychogenic seizures. 
 
Think About the other Mimics! 
 
“NMSS TPA TOX” 
Crack Cast Show Notes – Seizures – August 2017 
www.canadiem.org 
 
 
                              
 
 
Narcolepsy with cataplexy (sudden falls) 
Movement disorders - hemiballismus, tics 
Syncope 
Stroke 
 
Transient global amnesia 
Pseudoseizure (aka PNES) 
Atypical migraines 
 
Tox: 
❏ Extrapyramidal symptoms as side effects 
❏ ETOH withdrawal 
❏ Hypoglycemia 
❏ PCP use - buccolingual spasms 
❏ Tetanus/strychine/camphor - tonic spasm 
 
 
 
