# Metadata
- topic: 3.7 - Neurology - CC.-Ep104-Delirium-and-Dementia
- source_folder: 3.7 - Neurology
- original_file: CC.-Ep104-Delirium-and-Dementia.pdf

 
 
CrackCast Show Notes – Delirium and Dementia – August 2017 
www.canadiem.org/crackcast 
Chapter 94 – Delirium and Dementia 
Episode Overview 
 
Core questions:  
1. List the four key diagnostic criteria for delirium.   
2. List six strong predisposing or precipitating factors for delirium.  
3. List 15 causes of delirium.   
4. Describe how to use a screening tool for delirium (MMSE vs. CAM).    
5. List 3 potential medications used for chemical restraint.  
6. List 2 potential side effects of Haldol administration.  
7. Compare delirium with dementia.   
8. List important diagnostic studies for the workup of delirium.  
9. List four diagnostic criteria for dementia.  
10. List 10 specific causes of reversible dementia. 
11. List 10 causes of non-reversible dementia. 
 
Wisecracks:  
1. Explain how to differentiate between psychosis, delirium and dementia. 
2. How does Aricept work? 
3. Describe the pathophysiology of Alzheimer’s dz and list RFs for its development.  
4. What is the triad of normal pressure hydrocephalus? 
 
Rosens in Perspective:  
 
“Delirium is characterized by a fluctuating neurobehavioral disturbance typically progressing 
over a short period. It is a direct consequence of an acute systemic or central nervous 
system (CNS) stressor. Dementia, on the other hand, tends to follow a more gradual course, 
with evolution occurring over months to years. Although patients with dementia exhibit 
confusion, unlike delirium, manifestations of autonomic nervous system abnormalities are 
minimal or absent and a disturbance in level of consciousness usually is not a feature.” 
 
These big topics fall under the term neurobehavioural disturbances. Here is the big three 
step approach for us in the ER:  
1. Take a full collateral hx and do a physical exam to determine if this is delirium or 
dementia  
2. Rapidly treat any underlying cause of delirium  
3. “Establish a supportive environment and employ pharmaceutical adjuncts as needed” 
 
 
Core questions:  
[1] List the four key diagnostic criteria for delirium  
 
 
BOX 94.1 
Diagnostic Criteria for Delirium 
 
 
 
CrackCast Show Notes – Delirium and Dementia – August 2017 
www.canadiem.org/crackcast 
FOUR KEY CHARACTERISTICS 
• The disturbance develops over a short time period, represents a 
change from baseline attention and awareness, and tends to 
fluctuate in severity during the day. 
• Disturbance in attention and awareness. 
• There are additional disturbances in cognition, such as memory, 
disorientation language, visual spatial ability, or perception. 
• The disturbances are not better explained by another preexisting, 
established, or evolving neurocognitive disorder and do not occur 
in context of a coma. 
 
1. Acute onset with fluctuating course 
2. Disturbs attention and awareness (inattention)  
3. Disturbed Perception  
4. NOT better explained by another neurocognitive disorder  
 
Important to note these things on history (collateral hx is crucial):  
● Inattention  
● Short term memory impairment 
● Sleep-wake cycle changes 
● Inquiry about disturbed perceptions - hallucinations or delusions  
 
On physical exam:  
● Autonomic system dysfunction:  
○ Elevated or decreased: 
■ Pulse, RR, temp, BP.  
● Wernicke’s K.O.A.  
○ Remember that magnesium is a cofactor in thiamine utilization!! Replace 
BOTH.  
 
 
[2] List six strong predisposing or precipitating factors for delirium 
 
See table 94.1 for the whole list.  
Here are the ones with a STRONG level of evidence:  
● Predisposing variables:  
○ Age 
○ Dementia 
○ Hypertension  
● Precipitating variables 
○ Coma 
○ Previous delirium 
○ Emergency surgery 
○ Mechanical ventilation 
○ Trauma  
 
 
 
 
CrackCast Show Notes – Delirium and Dementia – August 2017 
www.canadiem.org/crackcast 
[3] List 15 causes of delirium  
 
Delirium is caused by a deregulation of neurotransmitter synthesis and metabolism.  
 
DIMES: 
● Drugs 
○ ETOH - intox or withdrawal 
○ Other street / recreational drugs 
○ Sedative / hypnotics 
○ Digoxin / lithium / quinidine / salicylate / antiepileptics  
○ Over the counter (anticholinergics), TCA,  
○ MANY others 
● Infection 
○ Meningitis, encephalitis, sinusitis, otitis media 
○ Pneumonia 
○ Peritonitis, pyelonephritis, cholecystitis, etc.  
○ Cellulitis  
● Metabolic 
○ hypo/hypernatremia 
○ Hyperosmolarity 
○ Hypercapnia 
○ Hypoxia 
○ Hyperglycemia  
○ Uremia  
○ Liver failure  
● Environmental 
○ Hypothermia (usually < 35 deg. C)  
○ Hyperthermia (usually > 42 deg. C)  
● Structural 
○ CVA, TBI, SAH, status epilepticus 
 
[4] Describe how to use a screening tool for delirium.  
 
Delirium can be present in a patient who is oriented to person, place and time; therefore we 
need a more comprehensive assessment tool!  
 
“A review of 11 bedside instruments used to identify the presence of delirium in adults 
concluded that the best evidence supported the use of the CAM as the best, and the Mini 
Mental State Exam as the least accurate test...In medical and surgical settings, the CAM has 
a sensitivity of 94 to 100 percent and a specificity of 90 to 95 percent ” Uptodate  
Pubmed link: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed?term=20716741 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CrackCast Show Notes – Delirium and Dementia – August 2017 
www.canadiem.org/crackcast 
Confusion Assessment Method (CAM) 
4 Key Features:  
 
1. Acute onset and fluctuating course  
2. Inattention 
3. Disorganized thinking  
4. Altered Level of conciousness  
 
The diagnosis of delirium requires the presence of features 1 AND 2 plus either 3 OR 4.  
 
Check out these other FREE delirium instruments/tools: 
https://www.hospitalelderlifeprogram.org/delirium-instruments 
 
 
[5] List 3 potential medications used for chemical restraint 
 
“The ideal sedating drug should have: low toxicity with minimal anticholinergic effects, ease 
of administration, short half-life, minimal effects on the cardiovascular and respiratory 
systems, and no effect on the seizure threshold” -- Rosen’s 9th Ed.  
 
Top three choices:  
● Haldol (haloperidol) - 1st Gen. antipsychotic 
○ Tried, trusted, true. We have extensive clinical experience with it.  
○ Wide dose range based on age, and comorbidities 
■ 0.5 - 10 mg IM** 
● 2nd generation antipsychotic -  
○ “(risperidone, olanzapine, ziprasidone, aripiprazole) may have equal or better 
efficacy and fewer side effects (especially akathisia and dystonia) for 
management of acute agitation in the psychiatric population.” 
● Benzodiazepines: 
 
○ Great choice, either solo or with an antipsychotic  
○ Great for acute undifferentiated agitation, intoxication, or withdrawal.  
○ **go to is LORAZEPAM 
■ Because diazepam has a very long half life.  
 
 
“We recommend either a benzodiazepine or antipsychotic (typical or atypical) used as 
monotherapy. As an alternative, a combination of a low-dose antipsychotic plus 
benzodiazepine (eg, haloperidol 5 mg IM plus lorazepam 2 mg) can be used. The 
combination approach has been found to be superior to either class alone in the treatment of 
undifferentiated acute agitation and has the added benefit of minimizing adverse effects.” - 
Rosen’s 9th Ed. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CrackCast Show Notes – Delirium and Dementia – August 2017 
www.canadiem.org/crackcast 
[6] List 2 potential side effects of Haldol administration 
 
1. EPS:  
“Studies of the acute administration of haloperidol report an 8% to 30% incidence of 
extrapyramidal side effects with akathisias being most common and acute dystonia 
occurring in less than 10% of Patients.”  
2. Prolonging the QTc:  
“more so when given intravenously, but this effect is clinically insignificant in most 
patients and does not require a pretreatment electrocardiogram. Caution is warranted 
with use of this agent in patients taking medications that prolong the QTc (eg, class IA 
and class III antiarrhythmics, certain antibiotics, inhibitors of the cytochrome P450 
system) and in patients with acute coronary ischemia, uncompensated congestive 
heart failure, or hepatic dysfunction. The QTc effect is not usually concerning when the 
haloperidol is given intramuscularly.” 
 
 
[7] Compare delirium with dementia  
 
Delirium is a medical emergency, while dementia isn’t. “Dementia is not a single disease 
entity but rather a highly variable clinical syndrome characterized by a gradually progressive 
deterioration of cognitive function.” 
 
A word on delirium prognosis: “After an episode of acute delirium, younger patients may 
experience mild cognitive dysfunction that lasts weeks to months. Elders, on the other hand, 
often experience persistent decline in their baseline level of functioning, with loss of at least 
one activity of daily living after acute delirium.”  
 
 
DELIRIUM  
DEMENTIA 
onset 
Acute 
slow 
awareness 
Reduced  
Clear  
alertness 
Fluctuates  
Normal  
Orientation  
impaired 
impaired 
memory 
impaired 
impaired 
Perception  
Hallucinations  
Intact 
Thinking 
Disorganized  
Vague  
Language  
Slow 
Word finding difficulty  
 
What are those four diagnostic criteria for delirium?  
● Acute onset with fluctuating course 
● Inattention 
● Altered perceptions / disorganized thinking - cognitive, memory, 
● NOT explained by a preexisting neurocognitive disorder 
 
 
CrackCast Show Notes – Delirium and Dementia – August 2017 
www.canadiem.org/crackcast 
 
[8] List important diagnostic studies for the workup of delirium 
 
These are guided by your comprehensive hx and physical exam:  
 
● Vital signs 
● Point of care glucose 
● CBC 
● Electrolytes, BUN, Crt, extended lytes, osmolality  
● Urinalysis  
● CXR 
● CT head 
● Maybe 
○ ABG (carbon monoxide, cyanide, hypercarbia, acidosis) 
○ Drug levels 
○ Troponin, Liver enzymes, TSH 
○ B12, folate, heavy metals, toxin screens of blood/urine/sweat, toxic alcohols, 
○ MRI brain 
○ LP - CSF analysis 
○ EEG (nonconvulsive status epilepticus)  
 
Up to 16% of patients have no underlying cause for delirium found despite intensive 
investigations  
 
 
[9] List four diagnostic criteria for dementia 
 
BOX 94.3 
Diagnostic Criteria for Dementia 
 
A. Cognitive decline from a previous level of performance in one or 
more cognitive domains: Complex attention, executive function, 
learning and memory, language, perceptual motor function, or 
social cognition. 
B. The disorder has an insidious onset and gradual progression. 
C. The deficits do not occur exclusively during the course of a 
delirium. 
D. The cognitive deficits are not better explained by another mental 
disorder, such as major depression or schizophrenia. 
 
Said another way:  
● IS: 
○ Insidious onset, with gradual progression 
○ Cognitive decline - function, learning, memory, social cognition 
● IS NOT: 
○ Occurring during delirium 
○ No explained by depression or schizophrenia (or another neurocog. disorder)  
 
 
CrackCast Show Notes – Delirium and Dementia – August 2017 
www.canadiem.org/crackcast 
 
BOX 94.2 Causes of Dementia 
 
PRIMARY DEGENERATIVE DEMENTIAS 
● Alzheimer’s disease 
● Lewy bodies disease 
● Frontal lobe disease (Pick’s disease) 
SUBCORTICAL DEMENTIAS 
● Parkinson’s disease 
● Huntington’s disease 
VASCULAR DEMENTIA 
● Multi-infarct dementia 
INTRACRANIAL PROCESSES 
● Space occupying lesions (tumor, subdural hematoma) 
● Hydrocephalus 
● CNS infections (HIV-1, neurosyphilis, chronic meningitis) 
● Repetitive head trauma 
ENDOCRINOPATHIES 
● Addinson’s and Cushing’s diseases 
● Thyroid and parathyroid disease 
NUTRITIONAL DEFICIENCIES 
● Thiamine 
● Niacin 
● Folate 
● Vitamin B12 
TOXIC EXPOSURES 
● Heavy metals 
● Carbon monoxide 
● Carbon disulfide 
DRUGS 
● Psychotropics 
● Antihypertensives 
● Anticonvulsants 
● Anticholinergics 
DEPRESSION 
● Pseudo-dementia 
 
 
[10] List 10 specific causes of reversible dementia. 
 
“Dementia is classified as either irreversible (primary degenerative) or potentially reversible 
(secondary); it is further classified according to the degree of cognitive impairment. 
● Mild dementia implies some impairment of work and social activities; however, the 
capacity for independent living remains intact.  
● With moderate dementia, independent living is hazardous, and some degree of 
supervision is necessary.  
● With severe dementia, continual supervision and often custodial care are needed.” 
 
 
CrackCast Show Notes – Delirium and Dementia – August 2017 
www.canadiem.org/crackcast 
Reversible causes:  
● Adverse drug reactions 
○ Psychotropic drugs 
○ Antihypertensive medications  
○ Anticonvulsants 
○ Anticholinergics  
○ L-dopa  
○ Heavy metal poisoning 
○ Carbon monoxide / carbon disulfide 
○ Trichlorethylene  
○ ETOH abuse  
● Endocrinopathies / Metabolic abnormalities 
○ Hypothyroidism 
○ Parathyroid disease  
○ Addison's disease  
○ Cushing’s disease  
○ Panhypopituitarism  
○ Thiamine deficiency  
○ Niacin deficiency 
○ Vitamin B12 def. 
○ Folate def.  
● Intracranial processes 
○ Tumours 
○ Hydrocephalus 
○ Chronic head trauma 
○ HIV 
○ Tuberculous or fungal meningitis  
○ Toxoplasmosis, cryptococcus, CMV, herpes virus, VZV 
● Depression  
 
[11] List 10 causes of non-reversible dementia. 
 
These are the primary degenerative diseases:  
● PRIMARY DEGENERATIVE DEMENTIAS 
○ Alzheimer’s disease 
○ Lewy bodies disease 
○ Frontal lobe disease (Pick’s disease) 
● SUBCORTICAL DEMENTIAS 
○ Parkinson’s disease 
○ Huntington’s disease 
● VASCULAR DEMENTIA 
○ Multi-infarct dementia 
● Attributable causes:  
○ Anoxic encephalopathy 
○ Hepatolenticular degeneration 
○ Tumours 
○ Slow virus infections  
 
 
CrackCast Show Notes – Delirium and Dementia – August 2017 
www.canadiem.org/crackcast 
 
The top three are:  
1. Alzheimer’s disease > 60% 
2. Subcortical dementia and vascular dementia > 20% 
3. Lewy body dementia (the type with well formed hallucinations - visual - and 
EPS)  
 
Wisecracks:  
[1] Explain how you differentiate between psychosis, delirium and 
dementia. 
 
“The goals of ED evaluation for suspected dementia are:  
(1) to recognize the signs and symptoms of undiagnosed and potentially 
reversible forms of dementia,  
(2) to identify the manifestations of acute illness in the demented patient promptly, and  
(3) to assess the clinical findings in lieu of the patient’s cognitive impairment 
and facilitate a safe disposition and expedited follow-up.” - Rosen’s 9th Ed.  
 
 
Psychosis 
Delirium 
Dementia  
● 
Hx of psychiatric illness 
● 
With depression: pt 
emphasizes cognitive 
dysfunction, failures and 
difficulties (dysphoria)  
● 
Less fluctuation 
● 
agitation, delusions, and 
psychotic behavior 
● 
Highly systematized 
delusions 
● 
NORMAL sensorium  
● 
Acute onset, fluctuating 
course / level of 
consciousness 
● 
Inattention 
● 
Abnormal vital signs 
(autonomic instability), labs, 
and examination  
● 
Abnormal sensorium  
 
● 
Often denial of impaired 
cognitive function or social 
avoidance 
● 
insidious, progressive, 
without much fluctuation, and 
occurs over a much longer 
time (months to years). 
Attention is relatively intact, 
as are remote memories in 
the earlier stages 
It is common for dementia to first present with a superimposed delirium or 
depression!  
 
[2] How does Aricept (Donepezil) work? 
 
Cholinesterase inhibitors (donepezil, rivastigmine, and galantamine) increase cholinergic 
transmission by inhibiting cholinesterase at the synaptic cleft and provide modest 
symptomatic benefit in some patients with dementia. 
 
They are not disease modifying, and often cause a functional improvement for 2-3 yrs in 
cases of mild dementia. They are known to cause cholinergic side effects.  
 
[3] Describe the pathophysiology of Alzheimer’s dz and list RFs for its 
development 
 
Anatomic changes:  
● Cortical atrophy - in temporal and hippocampal regions - loss of grey matter → loss 
of white matter 
 
 
CrackCast Show Notes – Delirium and Dementia – August 2017 
www.canadiem.org/crackcast 
Pathologic changes 
● Extracellular deposition of B-amyloid protein and neurofibrillary tangles (abnormal 
protein TAU which is involved in the process of neural regeneration).  
● Granulovascular degeneration - in the cortical blood vessels  
Neurochemical changes: 
● Decrease in acetylcholine  
 
Risk Factors 
● Age. 30-50% by age 85 yrs 
● Family history 
● Low education level 
● Hypercholesterolemia  
● Head trauma  
 
[4] What is the triad of normal pressure hydrocephalus? 
 
Think about this in the young patient (60 yrs or less) with:  
● Progressive dementia 
● Ataxia 
● Urinary incontinence  
 
 
 
