# Metadata
- topic: 5.1 - The Pediatric Patient - CC-EP-176-Musculoskeletal-Disorders-ch.-175-Rosens-9th-Ed.
- source_folder: 5.1 - The Pediatric Patient
- original_file: CC-EP-176-Musculoskeletal-Disorders-ch.-175-Rosens-9th-Ed..pdf

 
 
 
 
 
CrackCast Show Notes – Musculoskeletal Disorders – May 2017  
www.canadiem.org/crackcast 
 
 
Chapter 175 – Musculoskeletal Disorders 
 
Key concepts (points in bold are those that were podcasted)  
• 
The growth plate is the weakest part of the bone and is more likely to separate before the 
adjacent tendon or ligament tears, thereby making sprains uncommon. 
 
• 
Of supracondylar fractures, 95% are of the extension type. Displaced fractures are at risk for 
neurovascular injury and compartment syndrome; the anterior interosseous branch of the 
median nerve ("A-OK sign") and the brachial artery are most commonly involved. 
 
• 
Developmental dysplasia of the hip affects 1% of children; all children who are not yet walking 
should have a thorough hip evaluation, including Ortolani and Barlow testing. 
 
• 
Transient synovitis presents between 3 and 9 years of age and usually involves the hip. It can 
be differentiated from septic arthritis and other causes of hip pain with a thorough physical 
examination and directed laboratory and radiographic evaluation. 
 
• 
The peak incidence of septic arthritis is between 6 and 24 months of age. Patients presents with 
pain, fever, and decreased use of the involved limb. The knee is usually involved, followed by 
the hip. Inflammatory markers tend to be elevated, although they may be normal in young 
children with Kingella kingae infection (oropharyngeal colonizer). Blood and synovial fluid 
cultures are positive less than 50% of the time. Staphylococcus aureus is a frequent culprit. 
Treatment consists of joint drainage and empirical antibiotics (eg, nafcillin and ceftriaxone, with 
or without vancomycin). 
 
• 
Examination of the hip is warranted in all patients with knee pain. 
 
• 
Legg-Calvé-Perthes disease is an idiopathic avascular necrosis of the hip that has a peak 
presentation between 5 and 7 years of age. It is bilateral in 20% of cases. 
 
• 
A slipped capital femoral epiphysis (SCFE) is a posteroinferior slippage of the proximal femoral 
epiphysis on the metaphysis. It is more common in boys than girls, more common with obesity, 
and bilateral in 80% of cases. It is best seen on a cross-table or frog leg lateral view radiograph; 
90% are stable. 
 
• 
Osgood-Schlatter disease is the most common form of apophysitis. The onset is insidious, and 
treatment is conservative and symptomatic. A sudden onset of apophyseal pain is more suggestive 
of an avulsion fracture. 
 
Episode overview 
1. What are the indications for orthopedic surgery for clavicle fracture? 
2. List 5 Xray features of supracondylar fracture 
3. Describe the Gartland Classification for Extension-type supracondylar fractures 
4. List specific complications of a supracondylar fracture. 
5. Describe the sequence of ossification around the elbow. 
 
 
 
 
 
CrackCast Show Notes – Musculoskeletal Disorders – May 2017  
www.canadiem.org/crackcast 
 
 
6. What is Baumann’s Angle? (shownotes)  
7. Describe the radiographic findings and management of: 
a. Monteggia fracture-dislocation 
b. Toddler’s fracture 
c. Nursemaid’s elbow.  
8. Describe the Ortolani and Barlow maneuvers. (shownotes) 
9. List 3 physical exam findings consistent with DDH. 
10. List 10 causes of hip pain in children 
11. Provide a differential diagnosis of limp in the toddler, school-aged child and adolescent. 
12. How would you differentiate between transient synovitis and septic arthritis in a child with hip pain? 
13. What is the most common location for septic arthritis in a child? 
14. What is the prognosis for transient synovitis? 
15. What is the most common cause of septic arthritis? 
16. What are the important pathogens of septic arthritis in the following groups: 
a. Age < 2 months 
b. 2 months – 5 yrs 
c. 5 yrs – 12 yrs 
d. > 12 yrs 
e. Prosthetic joint 
f. 
Sickle cell disease 
g. Immunocompromised 
17. Describe three mechanisms for the development of septic arthritis in children. 
18. Regarding synovial fluid analysis, which tests should be ordered. How are the results interpreted? 
19. Describe the management of a child with septic arthritis? What the indications for operative 
debridement? 
20. What are the potential complications of septic arthritis?  
21. Describe the pathophysiology of Legg-Perthes disease; how does slipped capital femoral epiphysis 
(SCFE) occur? 
22. Describe the common clinical presentation of SCFE + LCPD 
23. Describe 2 radiographic findings consistent with SCFE + LCPD 
24. How is SCFE classified? How is this classification used to determine management? (shownotes)  
25. What is the risk of bilateral SCFE? (shownotes)  
26. What are the potential complications of SCFE? (shownotes) 
27. What is a juvenile Tilleaux fracture? How does it occur? 
28. What is a triplanar fracture? 
29. List seven red flags for pediatric back pain. 
30. What is spondylolysis? What is spondylolisthesis? How is it managed? 
31. List 4 common apophyseal injuries in children. 
 
 
Wisecracks 
1) List 6 specific xray findings / fractures consistent with non-accidental injury (shownotes) 
2) What is a corner / bucket handle fracture? 
3) What are the investigations in a complete skeletal survey (shownotes) 
4) List 4 conditions with similar presentation to child abuse (shownotes) 
5) List causes of pathologic fractures in children. 
6) What is the utility of blood culture, ESR and CRP in a child with suspected septic arthritis of the hip? 
 
 
 
 
 
CrackCast Show Notes – Musculoskeletal Disorders – May 2017  
www.canadiem.org/crackcast 
 
 
7) What the mechanism of a lateral elbow condyle fracture and how are they managed? (shownotes)  
8) What is the mechanism of a medial elbow condyle fracture and how are they managed? (shownotes)  
9) What is the most common pediatric fracture? 
 
Text in italics is from Rosen’s 9th edition, chapter 175 
 
Rosen’s In Perspective: 
• 
Pediatric fracture descriptions include bone location (diaphysis, metaphysis, physis, or epiphysis), 
relationship of fracture fragments to one another (angulation and displacement), and relationship of 
fracture fragments to adjacent tissue (open or closed), and involvement of the articular surface or not. 
• 
Check out this resource on what may be acceptable fracture angulations/displacements based on the 
age and bone! https://www.rch.org.au/clinicalguide/fractures/ 
 
1) What 5 unique types of fractures are seen in children? 
○ Plastic deformation. Bone is bowed, with no obvious cortical disruption. 
○ Torus fracture (buckle fracture). Buckling of bone without cortical disruption tends to occur 
from compression failure at the metaphyseal-diaphyseal junction. Distal radius buckle fractures 
may be immobilized with a Velcro wrist splint. These can be removed by the family or primary 
care provider in 3 to 4 weeks. 
○ Greenstick fracture. The bone is disrupted, along with one cortex; the periosteum on the 
fracture’s compression side remains intact (ED), minimally angulated (<10 degrees) distal 
radius greenstick fractures can be immobilized with a splint and patients referred to an 
orthopedic specialist within 1 week.  
○ Toddler’s fractures 
○ Bucket handle fractures 
2) List 4 differences between adult and pediatric bone 
○ is the presence of the physis (the growth plate) = physeal injuries, made up of proliferating 
cartilage cells between the metaphysis and epiphysis. The physis is the weakest part of the 
bone and more likely to separate before the adjacent tendon or ligament tears, making sprains 
less frequent and physeal injuries common. 
○ thick, physiologically active periosteum: reduces the amount of fracture displacement; 
promotes healing  
○ Growing bone is more porous, more pliable, and less dense than adult bone, making children 
more susceptible to fractures. Including buckle and bowing #s 
○ Greater potential for remodeling (even despite poor apposition and alignment)  
3) Describe the Salter-Harris classification system 
o See Rosen’s 9th edition Table 175.1 
o Salter I and II do not affect the germinal layer of the growth plate - so growth arrest is rare.  
o Type II is the most common 
 
 
Core questions 
1) What are the indications for orthopedic surgery for clavicle fracture? 
o “The physis of the clavicle does not close until the third decade (someone in their 20s) and is at risk 
for injury until that time. Midshaft fractures account for approximately 85% of all clavicle 
fractures. Most of these don’t need surgery.” – Rosen’s 9th edition 
 
 
 
 
 
CrackCast Show Notes – Musculoskeletal Disorders – May 2017  
www.canadiem.org/crackcast 
 
 
 
 
 
o Although complications are rare, due to the proximity of the clavicle to the great vessels and 
brachial plexus, a thorough neurovascular evaluation should be performed. Posterior 
sternoclavicular displacement can cause injury to the trachea, esophagus, and subclavian 
vessels, whereas lateral clavicular displacement can result in injury to the brachial plexus. Middle 
third fractures have been associated with neurovascular bundle injuries, pulmonary injury, and 
pneumothorax. 
 
o Reasons to call ortho: (red = obvious; black - you may have to know)  
1. Open fracture 
2. Skin tenting 
3. Neurovascular injury  
a. Brachial plexus, artery 
b. Suspicion for a posterior clavicle displacement injury 
4. Fractures with > 100% displacement of the fracture fragment  
5. Pathologic fractures  
6. Displaced medial third and lateral third fractures 
7. Distal clavicular fractures and middle clavicular fractures that are comminuted or 
displaced more than 2 cm may require surgical management; 
8. High-level athletes should also be referred to an orthopedist for surgical evaluation 
because surgical repair may expedite a return to sports. 
9. Severely comminuted or shortened middle third (>2 cm if over 12 years of age) 
 
o Younger children generally require shorter periods of immobilization (2–4 weeks) than adolescents 
and adults (4–8 weeks). 
o Rehabilitation includes early range of motion and strengthening of the rotator cuff. 
 
o Think of the 1-2-3 rule for clavicle fractures.  
o Three parts to it 
o Parts 1 and 3 are “odd” - because they are rare and should probably be run by the ortho on 
call if there is any displacement 
o Part 2 (middle ⅓) is “even” more common and up to 2 cm of displacement is allowed.  
 
 
 
 
 
CrackCast Show Notes – Musculoskeletal Disorders – May 2017  
www.canadiem.org/crackcast 
 
 
2) List 5 Xray features of supracondylar fracture 
• 
Until age 8 the ligaments and joint capsule around the elbow are stronger than the bone, so make sure 
you see three proper views: AP view of the extended elbow, oblique view, and lateral view of the flexed 
elbow. 
• 
Features:  
1. Posterior fat pad sign (indicates intra-articular injury; does not mean there must be a fracture - 
although ~90% of the time there is) on the lateral view 
1.1. 
Protruding or bulging anterior fat pad 
2. No bisection of the anterior ⅓ of the capitellum with the ANTERIOR HUMERAL LINE on the 
lateral view 
3. Broken “hour-glass” or deformed “figure of 8” on the lateral view 
4. LACK of the radiocapitellar line bisecting the capitellum on the lateral and AP extension views 
5. BREAK in the cortical lines of the distal humerus 
6. Asymmetric Baumann’s angle 
• 
For more, see: Figure 175.13 (in a normal elbow, the anterior humeral line and proximal radial line 
should bisect the capitellum), http://dontforgetthebubbles.com/elbow-xr-interpretation/, 
http://www.wikiradiography.net/page/The+Paediatric+Elbow 
 
• 
A helpful approach:  
o E - effusion 
o L - lines should line up! 
o B - bony cortex 
o O - ossification centres  
o W - watch all three views! (or WOW your consultant with Baumann’s angle)  
 
3) Describe the Gartland Classification for Extension-type supracondylar fractures 
• 
Supracondylar fractures are classified according to mechanism of injury as flexion or extension injuries. 
The extension type of injury constitutes 95% of all supracondylar fractures and typically results from a 
hyperextension injury incurred from a fall onto the outstretched arm. 
• 
Gartland classification of extension-type supracondylar fractures (see Rosen’s Table 175.2 for original) 
o I – nondisplaced fracture 
o II – displaced fracture with intact posterior cortex 
o III – displaced fracture with no cortical contact 
o IIIA – posteromedial rotation of the distal fragment 
o IIIB – posterolateral rotation of the distal fragment 
 
• 
When you order anything, Medium (medial) comes before Large (lateral) 
 
• 
Gartland type I fractures can be splinted in the ED, with the arm maintained in 90 degrees of flexion 
and neutral rotation. 
• 
Gartland type III fractures require immediate orthopedic consultation and should be treated in the 
operating room by closed reduction and percutaneous pinning or open reduction and internal fixation. 
Treatment of type II fractures is controversial. Some surgeons operatively reduce and pin, whereas 
others perform closed reduction and cast. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CrackCast Show Notes – Musculoskeletal Disorders – May 2017  
www.canadiem.org/crackcast 
 
 
• 
In the less common flexion type of supracondylar fracture, the elbow is flexed when it hits the ground. 
This mechanism results in a supracondylar fracture with anterior displacement of the distal fragment 
and failure of the cortex posteriorly. 
 
4) List specific complications of a supracondylar fracture. 
● Acute:  
○ Neurovascular injury - 11% of displaced SC# 
■ —the anterior interosseous branch of the median and radial nerves are at risk of 
damage in extension- type injuries; the ulnar nerve is damaged in flexion-type 
injuries. Most nerve injuries are neuropraxias that resolve spontaneously. 
Although motor function usually returns within 12 weeks, sensory function may not 
return for 6 to 12 months. 
○ Brachial artery injuries  
○ Acute compartment syndrome of the forearm or upper arm 
● Delayed 
○ Volkmann’s ischemic contracture, characterized by fixed elbow flexion, forearm pronation, 
wrist flexion, metacarpophalangeal joint extension, and interphalangeal flexion. 
○ Brachial artery thrombosis  
○ Malunion: Cubitus Varus - Gunstock deformity  
 
5) Describe the sequence of ossification around the elbow. 
• 
See Fig 175.12 and Table 175.4 for additional details 
• 
Sequence of ossification around the elbow: CRITOE 
• 
Age at appearance = 1,3,5,7,9,11 
o Capitellum = Age 1, close at 14 
o Radial head = Age 3, close at 16 
o Internal (medial internal epicondyle) = Age 5, close at 15 
o Trochlea = Age 7, close at 14 
o Olecranon = Age 9, close at 14 
o External (lateral external epicondyle) = Age 11, close at 16 
 
6) What is Baumann’s Angle? (shownotes)  
• 
“Baumann’s angle (aka humeral-capitellar angle) can help identify displacement of a pediatric 
supracondylar fracture. It is measured on an AP frontal radiograph with the arm in extension. The 
angle is formed by the humeral ais and a straight line through the epiphyseal plate of the capitelum. 
A value of 70-80 degrees is considered normal. Due to significant variation between individuals, 
Baumann’s angle is better evaluated by comparison to the contralateral side where a difference of 
more than 5 degrees is considered abnormal.” – Radiopaedia  
 
• 
Baumann’s angle is helpful in diagnosing a subtle supracondylar fracture (Fig. 175.14). This angle 
is formed by a line drawn to follow the growth plate of the capitellum transected with a line that runs 
perpendicular to the axis of the humerus. The angle should be approximately 75 to 80 degrees. 
Baumann’s angle should be the same in both elbows; differences between elbows can be used to 
detect subtle supracondylar fractures. In children younger than 3 years, difficult to distinguish bone 
landmarks limit the utility of Baumann’s angle. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CrackCast Show Notes – Musculoskeletal Disorders – May 2017  
www.canadiem.org/crackcast 
 
 
7) Describe the radiographic findings and management of: 
a. Monteggia fracture-dislocation 
i. 
a fracture of the proximal third of the ulna plus dislocation of the radial head. 
ii. 
MURG 
iii. 
The radiographic evidence can be subtle, with only a minor greenstick fracture or 
bowing of the ulna. Isolated ulna fractures are rare in children; therefore, with all such 
fractures, a dislocation of the radial head should be excluded 
iv. 
“Ulna bow sign” - make sure that the radial head transects the capitellum on all views! 
v. 
Require ortho - ORIF or CRIF 
 
b. Toddler’s fracture 
i. 
oblique nondisplaced fractures of the distal tibia caused by low-energy torsional forces 
applied to the porous bone of infants and young children. The peak incidence is 
between 1 to 3 years of age but it can occur in children as old as 6 years.  
ii. 
AP and lateral radiographs may reveal a spiral or oblique fracture extending downward 
and medially through the distal third of the tibia 
iii. 
An internal oblique radiograph is helpful if evidence of fracture is absent on the AP or 
lateral view. If no fracture is apparent, the child should be splinted for comfort and 
radiography repeated in 10 days, at which time periosteal new bone or sclerosis of the 
fracture edges will make the fracture visible. 
iv. 
Treatment of a toddler’s fracture consists of a long leg cast with the knee flexed for 
approximately 3 weeks. 
 
c. Nursemaid’s elbow.  
i. 
Radial head subluxation, also known as annular ligament displacement: the radial head 
slips out of the annular ligament, trapping the ligament in the radiocapitellar joint 
ii. 
MOI: Axial traction (pulling/swinging) on an extended, pronated arm.  
iii. 
may occur when the child falls onto the outstretched arm, sustains minor direct trauma 
to the elbow, or simply twists the arm. 
iv. 
5 months to 5 years.  
v. 
The affected arm is typically held against the body, with the elbow slightly flexed and the 
arm pronated. Physical examination is significant for lack of swelling, erythema, 
ecchymosis, or deformity. 
vi. 
Clinical diagnosis 
vii. 
Success rates are approximately 85% with supination and 95% with hyperpronation. 
Pronation may be less painful to the patient and is the reduction method of choice. 
viii. 
Child should start using their arm within 30 mins; it make take longer if the injury is > 4 
hrs old.  
 
• 
Children with extension-type supracondylar fractures hold the affected arm in extension with an S-
shaped configuration of the elbow and exhibit a prominence at the olecranon. 
 
8) Describe the Ortolani and Barlow maneuvers. (shownotes) 
• 
Ortolani (reduction) maneuver 
1. Stabilise the pelvis with one hand 
2. With the other hand, slighly abduct the infant’s hip 
 
 
 
 
 
CrackCast Show Notes – Musculoskeletal Disorders – May 2017  
www.canadiem.org/crackcast 
 
 
3. With the index and long fingers over the greater trochanger, pull up the thigh to gently 
reduce the hip 
• 
Barlow (provactive) test 
1. Stabilise the pelvis one hand 
2. Place the thumb on the inner aspect of the thigh near the lesser trochanter 
3. Adduct the hip 
4. Exert downward pressure on the thigh with the thumb and push it into the table 
• 
See also this graphic form medcomic – https://medcomic.com/medcomic/barlow-vs-ortolani/  
• 
See Rosen’s Box 175.1 for original table 
 
9) List 3 physical exam findings consistent with DDH. 
• 
Ranges from: subtle acetabular dysplasia to irreducible hip dislocations. Often despite screening, 
DDH can be missed until later infancy and childhood!  
● Asymmetry of  
○ Leg length  
■ Galeazzi’s sign: Apparent inequality of femur length is manifested as asymmetry in 
the level of the patient’s knees. 
○ Skin folds: in the groin, below the buttock, and along the thighs  
 
■ ***can be present of ⅓ of normal hips though!  
○ Hip joint range of motion: flexion, abduction (frog leg position)  
○ Leg movements  
● Abnormal findings on Barlow and Ortolani maneuvers (less reliable > 4 months of age)  
● Post walking:  
○ Asymmetric gait 
○ Asymmetric in-toeing or out-toeing  
○ Flexion contractures  
○ Hyperlordosis 
○ Trendelenburg gait  
 
10) List 10 causes of hip pain in children 
● Trauma: hip or pelvis fractures, overuse injuries 
● Infection: septic arthritis, osteomyelitis, myositis, Lyme disease 
● Inflammation: transient synovitis, juvenile rheumatoid arthritis, rheumatic fever 
● Neoplasm: leukaemia, osteogenic/Ewing’s sarcoma, metastatic disease 
● Haematologic disorders: haemophilia, sickle cell disease 
● Miscellaneous: Legg-Calvé-Parthes disease, slipped capital femoral epiphysis 
 
11) Provide a differential diagnosis of limp in the toddler, school-aged child and adolescent. 
 
Toddler 
School-aged child 
Adolescent  
Infectious 
Septic arthritis  
 
Gonococcal 
Inflammatory 
Transient synovitis 
JRA 
 
Traumatic 
Toddler’s fracture 
LCP 
SCFE  
Metabolic / malignant  
Hemophilia, SIckle cell 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CrackCast Show Notes – Musculoskeletal Disorders – May 2017  
www.canadiem.org/crackcast 
 
 
12) How would you differentiate between transient synovitis and septic arthritis in a child with hip 
pain? 
 
 
Transient synovitis 
Septic arthritis  
Background 
self-limited condition caused by a 
nonpyogenic inflammatory 
response of the synovium. 
 
Unknown etiology. Peak 3-9 yrs of 
age. ?post 
infectious/traumatic/inflammatory 
Septic arthritis refers to microbial invasion 
and infection of the joint space. Bacterial 
pathogens are common in patients with 
acute septic arthritis,  
 
whereas fungal and mycobacterial 
pathogens tend to be associated with a 
more 
indolent septic arthritis. 
 
Peak incidence at 6-24 months!  
Dx 
Insidious onset hip, knee or bilateral 
joint dysfunction. Diagnosis of 
exclusion after full hx, physical, 
imaging and labs 
 
● Well appearing 
○ May have low fever 
or malaise 
● hip/groin/knee/thigh/buttocks 
pain 
● Limited to no pain with 
passive ROM 
● Limping or unable to walk 
● leg is held in flexion, with 
slight abduction and external 
rotation. 
● Decreased range of motion 
with extreme internal rotation 
or abduction. 
● In transient synovitis, 
laboratory values may be 
normal or may reveal mild 
elevations in the WBC count, 
CRP level, and ESR, 
consistent with a nonspecific 
inflammatory process. 
**joint effusion on U/S is non-specific 
for either TS or SA.  
Infants 
tend to have fever, failure to feed, lethargy, 
pseudoparalysis of the extremity, and 
pain when being handled.  
 
Most older children have 
systemic signs and symptoms of fever, 
malaise, poor appetite, and 
irritability, as well as localized symptoms 
of pain and refusal to 
move the affected joint. If the lower part 
of the body is involved, 
patients may limp or refuse to walk.  
 
The physical examination 
reveals local erythema, warmth, and 
swelling. If the hip is affected, 
it often is held in flexion, abduction, and 
external rotation.  
 
Range 
of motion is decreased because of pain and 
muscle spasm, and 
passive joint movement is painful. In infants, 
joint dislocation 
may be observed. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CrackCast Show Notes – Musculoskeletal Disorders – May 2017  
www.canadiem.org/crackcast 
 
 
Children unable to bear weight with CRP 
values higher than 20 mg/L had a 74% 
probability of having septic arthritis. 
 
A complete blood count, CRP level, and 
ESR should be deter- 
mined, and radiography should be 
performed.  
 
Patients with severe symptoms—absent 
range of motion, ill-appearing, or 
inability to bear weight—fever higher than 
38.5°C (101.3°F), and elevated ESR (≥40 
mm/hr) or CRP (>2.0 mg/dL or >20 mg/L) 
should undergo joint aspiration. 
 
Dx with aspirate: gram stain, culture, cell 
count, differential, -ve crystals.  
 
See table in text for cut offs.  
Management 
Supportive  
IV abx; surgical consultation; non-weight 
bearing; analgesia  
 
● (Kocher criteria) can be used to “help” decide between TS and SA.  
○ fever,  
○ inability to bear weight,  
○ ESR of 40 mm/ (CRP > 20 mg/L) hr or higher,  
○ serum WBC count higher than 12,000 cells/μL. 
 
• 
Patients with three of the four predictors had a 93% chance of having septic arthritis, and those with 
all four had a 99% likelihood.  
• 
A subsequent study to validate these findings showed that patients with none of these predictors 
had a 2% probability of septic arthritis, with one predictor, a 9.5% probability, with two 
predictors, a 35% probability, with three predictors, a 73% probability, and with all four 
predictors, a 93% probability of septic arthritis. When this algorithm was tested at another 
institution, however, the presence of all four Kocher criteria predicted septic arthritis only 
59% of the time.  
• 
A CRP level can also help risk-stratify children for septic arthritis. In a study of children with hip 
effusions, children with the ability to bear weight combined with CRP values lower than 20 mg/L 
had less than a 1% risk of septic arthritis. Children unable to bear weight with CRP values higher 
than 20 mg/L had a 74% probability of having septic arthritis. 
• 
Thus, in children who are able to ambulate, have minimal pain after treatment with nonsteroidal 
antiinflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), and have normal inflammatory markers, outpatient management 
with close primary care follow-up is reasonable. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CrackCast Show Notes – Musculoskeletal Disorders – May 2017  
www.canadiem.org/crackcast 
 
 
13) What is the most common location for septic arthritis in a child? 
 
• 
⅓ have a hx of remote trauma.  
• 
Knee >>> Hip 
• 
90% occur via hematogenous spread.  
 
 
14) What is the prognosis for transient synovitis? 
• 
Excellent! Self-limited disease.  
 
• 
Thus, in children who are able to ambulate, have minimal pain after treatment with nonsteroidal 
antiinflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), and have normal inflammatory markers (CRP < 20 mg/L), 
outpatient management with close primary care follow-up is reasonable. The CRP should normalise 
within 1 week of supportive care.  
 
• 
Ideally follow up with good return instructions within 24 hrs. They should rest the affected joint and 
return to normal activity after the pain has subsided and ROM has normalized.  
 
• 
75% of patients are pain free at 2 weeks.  
 
• 
persistent joint effusion beyond 6 weeks may be associated with the subsequent development of 
Legg-Calvé-Perthes disease. 
 
15) What is the most common cause of septic arthritis? 
• 
Either MSSA or MRSA! 
• 
Usually presents with acute monoarticular arthritis! (usually lower extremity)  
 
16) What are the important pathogens of septic arthritis in the following groups: 
a. Age < 2 months (Group B strep – S. aureus, Gram negative rods, N. gonorrhoeae) 
b. 2 months – 5 yrs (S. aureus, S. penumonia, S. pyogenes, Kingella kingae, H. influenzae) 
c. 5 yrs – 12 yrs (S. aureus, S. pyogenes) 
d. > 12 yrs (S. aureus, N. gonorrhoeae) 
e. Prosthetic joint 
i. 
MRSA 
ii. 
Pseudomonas 
iii. 
Any other skin bugs  
f. 
Sickle cell disease 
i. 
Salmonella  
g. Immunocompromised 
i. 
Gram negative bacteria 
ii. 
Anything else 
1. Extrapulmonary TB 
2. Pseudamonas 
3. Candida  
4. Kingella kingae  
a. Yagupsky and colleagues have found that the clinical and laboratory 
features in young children (6–27 months of age) with K. kingae septic 
 
 
 
 
 
CrackCast Show Notes – Musculoskeletal Disorders – May 2017  
www.canadiem.org/crackcast 
 
 
arthritis and transient synovitis were so similar that the Kocher algorithm 
was not helpful and, even without fever or leukocytosis, they 
recommended blood cultures and nucleic acid amplification. 
 
17) Describe three mechanisms for the development of septic arthritis in children. 
● Hematogenous 
● Contiguous  
○ Direct inoculation 
○ Spread from adjacent infection  
● Iatrogenic  
 
 
18) Regarding synovial fluid analysis, which tests should be ordered? How are the results 
interpreted? 
● Tests to order 
○ Gram stain 
○ Aerobic and anaerobic culture 
■ PCR with nucleic acid amplification if suspicious for neisseria  
○ Cell count and differential 
○ Glucose, protein  
○ Crystals  
● See Table 175.6 for the original table 
  
• 
Heyworth and associates have found that 48% of patients with synovial WBC counts of 50,000 
cells/mm3 or more had septic arthritis, as did 17% of those with synovial WBC counts less 
than 50,000 cells/mm3 
• 
The synovial glucose concentration may be low (synovial fluid glucose/blood glucose ratio < 
0.5) and protein and lactate levels elevated. Because of the intrinsic immunoglobulins in the 
synovial fluid, cultures will be positive in less than 50% of cases. 
 
19) Describe the management of a child with septic arthritis? What the indications for operative 
debridement? 
● Septic arthritis requires hospital admission, antibiotics, and surgical intervention. 
● Surgical options range from needle aspiration to open surgical drainage.  
 
● Indications for surgical drainage in children with septic arthritis 
o involvement of the hip joint,  
o presence of large amounts of pus or debris in the joint,  
o loculated fluid,  
o recurrence of joint fluid after four or five aspirations, 
o lack of clinical improvement within 3 days of the initiation of appropriate therapy. 
 
20) What are the potential complications of septic arthritis?  
• 
Local:  
o Avascular necrosis  
o Osteomyelitis  
o Cartilage destruction 
 
 
 
 
 
CrackCast Show Notes – Musculoskeletal Disorders – May 2017  
www.canadiem.org/crackcast 
 
 
o Loss of mobility  
o Leg length discrepancy 
o Persistent pain  
o Ligament/muscle/bursal fibrosis/scarring/calcification 
• 
Systemic:  
o Bacteremia 
o Infective endocarditis 
o Sepsis  
 
21) Describe the pathophysiology of Legg-Perthes disease; how does slipped capital femoral 
epiphysis (SCFE) occur? 
• 
Idiopathic avascular necrosis of the proximal femoral head, also known as Legg-Calvé-Perthes 
disease, is named after the men who independently described it in the early 1900s.  
• 
The cause remains unclear; theories are myriad and research results conflicting.  
 
• 
SCFE:  A slipped capital femoral epiphysis (SCFE) involves posterior and inferior slippage of 
the proximal femoral epiphysis on the metaphysis.  
• 
The cause of SCFE is unknown but is likely to be related to biomechanical and hormonal 
factors.  
• 
Obesity results in increased shear forces across a more vertically and posteriorly oriented 
growth plate that has been weakened by architectural irregularities and hormonal changes of 
puberty. The consequence is slippage of the epiphysis inferiorly and posteriorly in the direction 
of the weight-bearing force. 
 
• 
Usually idiopathic and associated with obesity.  
 
 
22) Describe the common clinical presentation of SCFE + LCPD 
SCFE 
LCPD 
(1) race—higher prevalence in African 
Americans, Hispanics, and Pacific Islanders 
than whites;  
(2) geography—higher rates north of 40-degree 
latitude and in the northeastern and western 
United States;  
(3) gender—boys > girls  
(4) underlying medical conditions—more 
frequent with endocrinopathies (obesity), 
renal osteodystrophy, and radiation therapy. 
 
White male, higher latitude  
peak incidence is during the adolescent growth 
spurt, boys between 12 and 16 years of age (mean, 
13.5 years) and girls between 10 and 14 years of 
age (mean, 11.5 years). 
occurs between the ages of 3 and 12 years, with the 
peak incidence between the ages of 5 and 7 years. 
 
 
 
 
 
CrackCast Show Notes – Musculoskeletal Disorders – May 2017  
www.canadiem.org/crackcast 
 
 
 
90% of all cases of SCFE are stable,  
 
● intermittent limp and pain for weeks to 
months.  
● Pain in the hip, thigh, groin, or knee. 
● weakness and easy fatigability of the 
affected limb and limping on exertion.  
● Progression = progressive external rotation 
and shortening of the involved extremity, with 
subsequent difficulty in daily activities, such 
as tying shoes.  
On examination:  
● loss of internal rotation and experience 
pain only at the extremes of motion.  
 
Advanced disease:  
● Antalgic gait, internal rotation is lost, 
abduction 
and flexion of the hip increase, thigh and gluteal 
muscle atrophy 
is more pronounced, and leg-length discrepancy 
develops. 
Drehmann’s sign can be elicited during passive 
flexion of the 
affected hip when the patient is supine; as flexion is 
increased 
from an extended position, the thigh abducts and 
rotates 
externally. 
 
● Insidious and stuttering onset of limp 
● Gradual pain - anywhere (groin, butt, knee, 
thigh)  
○ Worse with activity better with rest 
○ Worst in the evening  
● Limited ROM - esp. Abduction and IR 
 
 
 
 
 
23) Describe 2 radiographic findings consistent with SCFE + LCPD 
MRI is a much more sensitive test for both diseases.  
 
SCFE 
LCPD 
diagnosis of SCFE is made with AP and lateral 
radiographs of both hips. With stable slippage, AP 
and frog leg lateral pelvic radiographs should be 
obtained. 
 
● Lateral view: include a minimal posterior 
Legg-Calvé-Perthes disease is diagnosed and 
staged by AP and frog leg lateral radiographs. 
● Radiolucent, V-shaped, osteoporotic defect in 
the lateral epiphysis (Gage’s sign),  
● speckled calcification lateral to the capital 
epiphysis,  
 
 
 
 
 
CrackCast Show Notes – Musculoskeletal Disorders – May 2017  
www.canadiem.org/crackcast 
 
 
step-off at the anterior physeal plate and 
widening of the growth plate. 
● AP view: asymmetric Klein’s line (>2 
mm)*; blanch sign of Steele  
 
 
 
*Klein’s line 
 
is a line drawn along the superior margin of the 
femoral neck. 
With a normal hip, the line intersects with or falls 
within the 
epiphysis, whereas in a hip with a slipped epiphysis, 
the line does 
not come into contact with the epiphysis. 
● Diffuse metaphyseal reaction (metaphyseal 
cysts),  
● lateral capital femoral epiphysis subluxation,  
● and a horizontal physis. 
 
 
 
LCPD (from radiopedia)  
 
 
SCFE (from radiopedia)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
CrackCast Show Notes – Musculoskeletal Disorders – May 2017  
www.canadiem.org/crackcast 
 
 
 
- 
Note the abnormal Klein's line (left hip)  
- 
modified Klein’s line is a comparison of the amount of epiphysis lateral to the Klein line on the 
symptomatic side compared with the same measurement on the asymptomatic side, with a difference 
of 2 mm being significant. 
- 
The blanch sign of Steele, another SCFE finding seen on the AP radiograph, is a crescent-shaped area 
of increased density in the proximal portion of the femoral neck created by superimposition of the 
posteriorly displaced epiphysis on the femoral neck. 
 
24) How is SCFE classified? How is this classification used to determine management? 
(shownotes)  
• 
Much simpler classification than LCPD! 
• 
Classification of SCFE is based on stability.  
 
• 
With or without crutches, in stable SCFE, ambulation is possible, whereas in unstable SCFE, 
ambulation is not possible.  
• 
This classification system is preferred to the traditional classification because it does not rely on patient 
or parent recall for duration of symptoms and provides information about prognosis. 
 
25) What is the risk of bilateral SCFE? (shownotes)  
• 
SCFE is bilateral in up to 80% of cases, although 30% to 40% of these cases are asymptomatic and 
discovered only on screening radiographs. In unilateral cases, the left hip is affected twice as often as 
the right. 
 
26) What are the potential complications of SCFE? (shownotes) 
• 
Two most common: 
o Avascular necrosis  
o Chondrolysis  
• 
Others: nonunion, premature closure of the epiphyseal plate, and degenerative changes. Degenerative 
hip arthritis develops over decades and has an earlier onset, with more severe degrees of slippage. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CrackCast Show Notes – Musculoskeletal Disorders – May 2017  
www.canadiem.org/crackcast 
 
 
27) What is a juvenile Tillaux fracture? How does it occur? 
• 
See the Orthobullets notes here – https://www.orthobullets.com/pediatrics/4028/tillaux-fractures  
• 
Juvenile Tillaux fractures with >2 mm of displacement warrant urgent orthopedic consultation 
for closed or open reduction. 
 
 
 
 
28) What is a triplanar fracture? 
● See the orthobullets notes here – https://www.orthobullets.com/pediatrics/4029/triplane-fractures 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CrackCast Show Notes – Musculoskeletal Disorders – May 2017  
www.canadiem.org/crackcast 
 
 
 
 
 
29) List seven red flags for pediatric back pain. 
• 
You need to think broadly 
• 
From Uptodate: 
● MSK 
○ Nonspecific - idiopathic low back pain 
○ spondylolysis and spondylolisthesis; scoliosis; Scheuermann's (juvenile) kyphosis; and 
intervertebral disc degeneration, herniation, or calcification 
● Infectious 
○ discitis, vertebral osteomyelitis (including tuberculous), epidural abscess, and bacterial infection 
of the sacroiliac joint. Non Spinal infections that can present with back pain include paraspinous 
muscle abscess (pyomyositis), pyelonephritis, pneumonia, pelvic inflammatory disease, 
endocarditis, and myalgia caused by viral illness. 
● Inflammatory 
○ ankylosing spondylitis, psoriatic arthritis, the arthritis of inflammatory bowel disease, and 
reactive arthritis. 
● Neoplastic 
○ Osteoid osteoma is the most common tumor that presents with back pain in children. Other 
tumors that can present in the spine include leukemia, lymphoma, Ewing sarcoma, 
neuroblastoma, osteoblastoma, osteosarcoma, neurofibroma, and Langerhans cell histiocytosis 
(eosinophilic granuloma) 
● Referred  
 
 
 
 
 
CrackCast Show Notes – Musculoskeletal Disorders – May 2017  
www.canadiem.org/crackcast 
 
 
○ sickle cell pain crisis or vertebral body collapse, syringomyelia, cholecystitis, pancreatitis, 
chronic recurrent multifocal osteomyelitis, pyelonephritis, and chronic pain syndromes. 
● Hx:  
○ Age < 4 yrs 
○ Wt loss  
○ Hx of CA, TB exposure 
○ Progressive, severe, nocturnal, disabling pain  
○ Morning stiffness, radiation to legs 
○ Hx of repetitive trauma or high level sports  
○ No relief with rest 
● Physical: 
○ Fever 
○ Fever and weight loss 
○ Asymmetric reflexes, tone, power, bladder/bowel symptoms  
 
30) What is spondylolysis? What is spondylolisthesis? How is it managed? 
● Spondylolysis is a unilateral or bilateral defect (separation) in the vertebral pars interarticularis (defect), 
usually in the lower lumbar vertebrae, particularly L5. With bilateral defects, the vertebral body can slip 
anteriorly, a condition known as spondylolisthesis.  
Grossly simplified management plan…! 
● Spondylolysis: rest from inciting activities for 4-6 weeks 
● spondylolisthesis:  Grade 1 with no neuro deficits = rest for 60-90 days.  
 
 
31) List 4 common apophyseal injuries in children. 
 
● The apophysis is a cartilaginous structure that serves as a site for insertion of tendons on the 
growing bone. It has its own growth plate, with a slower rate of growth than the nearby epiphyseal 
plate. Apophysitis is unique to patients with skeletal immaturity and involves inflammation of this 
actively growing bone prominence, which is under great tensile stress. 
 
● Little leaguer’s elbow (medial epicondylitis)  
○ including apophysitis, medial epicondylitis, and osteochondritis dissecans of the radial head and 
capitellum. 
● Osgood schlatter’s disease - tibial tubercle  
● Sinding-Larsen-Johansson syndrome - inferior patella 
○ https://www.orthobullets.com/sports/3030/sinding-larsen-johansson-syndrome 
● Sever’s disease  
○ apophysitis of the calcaneus due to traction by the gastrocnemius-soleus complex. 
● Hip/Pelvis apophysitis  
○ ASIS - tensor fasciae latae; sartorius  
○ AIIS - Rectus femoris  
○ Iliac crests - abdominal muscles  
○ Ischial tuberosities – hamstrings 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CrackCast Show Notes – Musculoskeletal Disorders – May 2017  
www.canadiem.org/crackcast 
 
 
● Thanks to Orthobullets for this image: 
 
 
 
Wisecracks 
1. List 6 specific xray findings / fractures consistent with non-accidental injury (shownotes) 
○ See Orthobullets: https://www.orthobullets.com/pediatrics/4001/pediatric-abuse 
 
2. What is a corner / bucket handle fracture? 
○ From orthobullets:  
■ Fractures often seen in non-ambulatory child that are highly suspicious for NAT.  
■ Bucket handle fracture: horizontal avulsion fracture with appearance of central and 
peripheral components gives the appearance of a bucket handle.  
● 
 
■ Corner fracture: discrete avulsion of the metaphysis 
● 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CrackCast Show Notes – Musculoskeletal Disorders – May 2017  
www.canadiem.org/crackcast 
 
 
3. What are the investigations in a complete skeletal survey (shownotes) 
● The standard skeletal survey [from Uptodate] 
○ Appendicular skeleton 
■ Humeri (AP) 
■ Forearms (AP) 
■ Hands (PA) 
■ Femurs (AP) 
■ Lower legs (AP) 
■ Feet (AP) 
○ Axial skeleton 
■ Thorax (AP, lateral, right and left oblique views to include ribs, thoracic spine and 
upper lumbar spine) 
■ Ribs (oblique views) 
■ Abdomen (AP, to include pelvis) 
■ Lumbosacral spine (lateral) 
■ Skull (frontal and lateral) 
■ Cervical spine (lateral, if not completely visualised on lateral skull) 
○ Technique (high resolution, high contrast) 
○ ...including specific view of areas with bruising and tenderness!  
 
4. List 4 conditions with similar presentation to as child abuse (shownotes) 
● osteogenesis imperfecta 
● osteopenia of prematurity 
● scurvy  
● copper deficiency 
● Menkes disease 
● disuse osteopenia (nonambulatory or minimally ambulatory children) 
● chronic disease (kidney and liver) 
 
5. List causes of pathologic fractures in children. 
● bone tumors, rickets, McCune-Albright syndrome, juvenile osteoporosis, chronic renal insufficiency, 
osteogenesis imperfecta (OI), and osteopetrosis are all at greater risk for fractures.  
● The proximal femur and humerus are the most frequent sites for pathologic fractures and 
unicameral (simple) bone cysts, aneurysmal bone cysts, and nonossifying fibromas are the most 
common tumors. -uptodate  
 
 
6. What is the utility of blood culture, ESR and CRP in a child with suspected septic arthritis of the 
hip? 
 
● ESR and CRP are better “rule out tests”. They play an important role in the workup - but minimal 
elevations don’t rule out the diagnosis. They can also play a role in monitoring response to therapy.  
 
● A CRP <1 mg/dL (10 mg/L) was associated with a negative predictive value of 87 percent for positive 
synovial fluid culture. CRP is more useful than ESR for monitoring response to treatment; the CRP 
peaks within 36 to 50 hours of onset of infection and usually falls to normal within a week of successful 
treatment, whereas ESR may remain elevated for up to 30 days.  
 
 
 
 
 
CrackCast Show Notes – Musculoskeletal Disorders – May 2017  
www.canadiem.org/crackcast 
 
 
 
● We recommend that aerobic blood cultures be obtained in all patients in whom bacterial arthritis is a 
consideration. Blood cultures are positive in approximately 40 percent of cases and sometimes yield 
the pathogen when joint fluid cultures are negative. Anaerobic cultures should be obtained if anaerobic 
infection is a concern (eg, direct inoculation or in jugular vein suppurative thrombophlebitis [also known 
as Lemierre's syndrome] caused by Fusobacterium infection. - uptodate.  
 
 
7. What the mechanism of a lateral elbow condyle fracture and how are they managed? 
(shownotes)  
 
● Classified using Milch system (Type 1 – # line lateral to trochlear groove vs Type 2 – # line into 
trochlear groove) 
● From orthobullets: 
○ Usually ~6 yr olds. HIGH risk fracture; elbow injury in kids with the worst prognosis - don’t 
miss it!  
○ mechanism of injury 
■ pull-off theory: avulsion fracture of the lateral condyle that results from the pull of the 
common extensor musculature 
■ push-off theory: fall onto an outstretched hand causes impaction of the radial head 
into the lateral condyle causing fracture 
● If no displacement - long arm cast x 4-6 weeks 
● If displaced may need operative fixation.  
 
 
8. What is the mechanism of a medial elbow condyle fracture and how are they managed? 
(shownotes)  
● Mechanism 
○ fall on outstretched arm: most common 
○ elbow dislocation: associated with elbow dislocations in up to 50%, most spontaneously 
reduce but fragment may be incarcerated in joint 
○ traumatic avulsion: usually occurs in overhead throwing athletes 
● Management 
○ Shorter periods of immobilization if not significantly displaced.  
● Don’t forget to think about medial epicondylitis - if > 5mm of displacement surgery may be 
indicated!  
 
9. What is the most common pediatric fracture? 
● Probably the distal forearm - buckle/torus fracture.  
 
Check out https://www.rch.org.au/clinicalguide/fractures/ 
Next time you’re on shift and don’t know what’s acceptable!  
