# Metadata
- topic: 5.2 - The Pregnant Patient - CC-EP-179-Drug-Therapy-in-Pregnancy-1
- source_folder: 5.2 - The Pregnant Patient
- original_file: CC-EP-179-Drug-Therapy-in-Pregnancy-1.pdf

Crack Cast Show Notes – Drug Therapy in Pregnancy 
www.canadiem.org 
  
 
 
 
CRACKCast Episode 179: Drug Therapy in Pregnancy 
Episode Overview 
Key concepts: 
• 
Chemically induced birth defects are believed to be responsible for approximately 1% to 
3% birth defects. 
 
• 
Gestational age is crucial in determination of the impact of any given exposure, 
especially during organogenesis (days 21–56 of fetal life), when major body organs are 
formed. 
 
• 
Human data on teratogenicity and fetal toxicity of medications is often limited, and 
causal associations are difficult to determine, especially with newer medications. 
 
• 
In general, the health of the fetus is directly related to the health of the mother, and 
drugs should be given when the maternal benefits outweigh the risks to the fetus. 
 
• 
Certain medications should be avoided during pregnancy, if possible, because they are 
known teratogens or cause potential toxic effects in the newborn; these include 
anticonvulsants, warfarin derivatives, NSAIDs, sulfonamides, fluoroquinolones, and ACE 
inhibitors. 
 
Core Questions  
1. Describe the classification system of drug toxicity in pregnancy 
2. List 10 bad teratogens  
3. List 5 dangerous medicines to be avoided if breastfeeding. 
4. List 4 dangerous antibiotics in pregnancy? 
5. List 2 safe anti-dysrhythmics in pregnancy 
6. What is your first-choice vasopressor in pregnancy? 
7. What analgesics and antiemetics are safe in pregnancy? 
 
Rosens in Perspective 
 
This chapter is all about safety.  It is a long chapter in the textbook with a lot of “what ifs, 
maybes, probablys.” The reality is that we don’t have a lot of solid evidence to “PROVE” any 
one drug is totally safe in pregnancy. As a result we’re definitely avoiding any drugs that haven’t 
been studied! ie 90% of drugs…!  
 
As a quick refresher: a teratogen is any chemical, pharmacologic, environmental, or mechanical 
agent that can cause disruptive development of the conceptus. Included in this definition are 
functional impairment, growth restriction, and congenital malformations. These may range from 
subtle neurobehavioral effects to devastating physiologic effects and physical deformities, 
including fetal death. 
 
Crack Cast Show Notes – Drug Therapy in Pregnancy 
www.canadiem.org 
  
 
 
 
In reality we should care about preconception health all the way till the baby is weaned from 
breasting feeding; however classically the highest risk times are during the time of 
organogenesis (days 21–56 of fetal life). (Exposure during this period may result in major 
anatomic defects.)  
 
Exposure after the period of organogenesis may affect the growth and development of the fetus. 
Functional development of the central nervous system (CNS) is affected when it is exposed to a 
CNS teratogen during the 10th to 17th weeks of pregnancy.  
 
Check out more information at: http://www.motherisk.org/prof/index.jsp 
 
 
[1] Describe the classification system of drug toxicity in pregnancy 
 
This question is already out of date because the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) had 
assigned one of five letters—A, B, C, D and X—to the drug, depending on the strength of 
evidence for its safety or teratogenicity.  
 
See Box 180.1 for more details. Essentially: 
Class A – Controlled studies show no risk  
Class B – No evidence exists for human subjects 
Class C – Use may engender risk for fetus  
Class D – Positive evidence of risk is based on studies or post-marketing data 
Class X – Drugs are contraindicated in pregnancy  
 
• 
This classification system has been criticized as overly simplistic and perhaps 
inaccurate. Many believed that the classification system conveyed the incorrect 
impression that there is a gradation of reproductive risk from exposure across categories 
(ie, that risk increases from A to B to C to D to X) and that the drugs within a given 
category present similar reproductive risks. 
• 
As a result more than 90% of newly introduced drugs in the United States are assigned 
to class C, an undetermined teratogenic risk.  
• 
However in 2015 the FDA issued a final rule for drug labeling during pregnancy, called 
the Pregnancy and Lactation Labeling Rule (PLLR)  
o Available at https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5083079/ 
o PLLR changes the content and format for prescription drug labeling to help 
health care providers assess the benefits and risks in counseling pregnant and 
nursing women who are taking medications.  
o The rule requires the removal of letter categories and mandates labeling that 
includes a summary of risks of drug use during pregnancy and lactation, a 
discussion of the data supporting that summary, and any relevant information to 
help health care providers make informed decisions and counsel patients.  
o Drugs already approved before this rule will be phased in gradually. 
Crack Cast Show Notes – Drug Therapy in Pregnancy 
www.canadiem.org 
  
 
 
 
• 
So, when you look up old drugs you’ll see the “Pregnancy Risk Factor” listed, but newer 
drugs will just have “Pregnancy Implications” listed.  
o More information is available at: 
§ 
https://www.fda.gov/Drugs/DevelopmentApprovalProcess/DevelopmentR
esources/Labeling/ucm093307.htm 
§ 
http://rheumnow.com/content/pllr-pregnancy-lactation-labeling-rule-
explained 
 
[2] List 10 bad teratogens  
 
As stated above this pregnancy risk scoring system is no longer being used as of 2015. See 
question 1.   
 
Here are some “X” drugs 
o Any birth control pills or hormonal agents 
o Isotretinoin 
o Leflunomide  
o Methotrexate 
o Methylene blue 
o Phenytoin 
o Phenobarbital  
o Rosuvastatin  
o Simvastatin 
o Tamazepam 
o Valproate 
o Warfarin  
 
Here are some “D” drugs 
o Amiodarone 
o All NSAIDS in the 3rd trimester 
o Carbamazepine 
o Paroxetine  
o Sulfonamides  
o Tetracyclines 
 
 
[3] List 5 dangerous medicines to be avoided if breastfeeding 
 
Concerns exist for: 
o Amiodarone 
o Chemotherapeutic/antineoplastic agents 
o Chloramphenicol 
o Ergotamine 
Crack Cast Show Notes – Drug Therapy in Pregnancy 
www.canadiem.org 
  
 
 
 
o Gold salts 
o Phenindione 
o Radioactive pharmaceuticals 
o Retinoids 
o Tetracyclines (chronic > 3 weeks) 
o Certain psychotropic medications 
o Codeine 
o Pseudoephedrine 
 
Copied from: https://www.aap.org/en-us/Pages/Breastfeeding-and-Medication.aspx 
For more resources on this, see:  
o https://mothertobaby.org/ 
o https://toxnet.nlm.nih.gov/newtoxnet/lactmed.htm 
 
[4] List 4 dangerous antibiotics in pregnancy 
 
Antibiotics without known teratogenic effects include: 
o Cephalosporins 
o Penicillins 
o Erythromycin (except the estolate) 
o Azithromycin 
o Clindamycin  
o Augmentin 
o Metronidazole.   
 
Though indication and unmeasured confounders could account for results, in a nested case 
control study including over 95,000 pregnant women, an association between spontaneous 
abortion and first trimester use of:  
o Macrolides 
o Tetracyclines (excluding erythromycin)  
o Quinolones  
o Sulfonamides 
o Metronidazole 
 
Source: UpToDate 
 
Avoided agents typically include therefore: 
o Aminoglycosides 
o Doxycycline 
o Tetracyclines 
o Fluoroquinolones  
o Trimethoprim 
o Sulfonamides 
o Nitrofurantoin 
Crack Cast Show Notes – Drug Therapy in Pregnancy 
www.canadiem.org 
  
 
 
 
 
[5] List 2 safe anti-dysrhythmics in pregnancy 
 
o Adenosine 
o Digoxin 
o Verapamil 
o Procainamide  
o Some beta blockers  
 
The top four are definitely the most widely supported. Electrical cardioversion is very safe!  
 
Emergent or elective electrical cardioversion can be performed at all stages of pregnancy, and 
should be used for any sustained arrhythmia with hemodynamic compromise and can be 
considered for drug-refractory arrhythmias. Electrical cardioversion does not result in 
compromise of blood flow to the fetus. While there is a theoretical risk of inducing an arrhythmia 
in the fetus, this risk is very small due to the high fibrillation threshold and small amount of 
energy reaching the fetus.  
 
Nonetheless, fetal rhythm monitoring is recommended because of rare reported cases of 
cardioversion precipitating fetal distress requiring emergency cesarean delivery. In the third 
trimester, some physicians prefer to perform electrical cardioversion under general anesthesia 
and intubation considering the more difficult airway and increased risk of gastric aspiration 
during pregnancy. - UpToDate 
 
 
[6] What is your first-choice vasopressor in pregnancy? 
 
According to Rosen’s, the first-choice drug for a pregnancy women in shock is phenylephrine.  
 
But let’s dive deeper with some help from Uptodate. 
 
The big concern is balancing maternal blood flow and fetal blood flow. Vasopressors and 
inotropes can vasoconstrict uterine blood vessels, reducing fetal blood flow.  
 
Thus, other interventions should be used initially to manage hypotension, such as administration 
of intravenous fluids and placing the patient in the left lateral decubitus position to prevent 
compression of the inferior vena cava by the gravid uterus. Hypotension that persists despite 
these initial interventions requires vasopressor therapy, since sustained maternal hypotension 
decreases uterine blood flow. 
 
There is a paucity of clinical studies with no consensus about which is the best vasopressor for 
maternal hypotension or shock due to critical illness. In addition, the 2016 sepsis treatment 
guidelines published by the Society of Critical Care Medicine do not specifically address the 
care of pregnant patients. However, we agree with others that following these guidelines is 
Crack Cast Show Notes – Drug Therapy in Pregnancy 
www.canadiem.org 
  
 
 
 
reasonable for the management of maternal hypotension from septic shock. Thus, we consider 
norepinephrine as the first-line vasoactive agent in pregnant patients who fail to respond to early 
aggressive volume resuscitation. Although norepinephrine can reduce uterine blood flow, there 
are no data to suggest that norepinephrine has an adverse effect on the well-being of the fetus. 
Thus, we consider this risk to be outweighed by the benefit of maternal resuscitation. 
For pregnant patients with refractory shock, the best second line agent is unknown. However, 
indirect evidence from randomized trials of vasopressors for hypotension caused by spinal 
anesthesia and the 2016 sepsis guidelines, suggest that phenylephrine may a reasonable 
second-line agent.  - UpToDate 
 
[7] What analgesics and antiemetics are safe in pregnancy? 
 
Don’t use them unless you need them! Also, short courses (< 48-96 hrs) are much safer than 
long term use!  
 
 
Analgesics 
Antiemetics  
“Safe” 
Acetaminophen  
NSAIDs  
Safe during weeks 12-30 (second trimester) 
Second-line agent  
Opioids 
Third line choice if all other agents ineffective 
Fentanyl and morphine most commonly used 
Consider avoiding altogether in first trimester and 
before term 
Vitamin b6  
Doxylamine succinate 
Ginger 
Diphenhydramine  
Dimenhydrinate  
Metoclopramide  
Prochlorperazine 
Ondansetron  
DO 
NOT 
use 
Codeine  
Ergotamine 
 
 
