# Metadata
- topic: 4.2 - Toxicology - CC-lithium
- source_folder: 4.2 - Toxicology
- original_file: CC-lithium.pdf

 
 
CrackCast Show Notes – Lithium – March 2018 
www.canadiem.org/crackcast 
CRACKCast E160 – Lithium 
 
Key concepts;  
 
❏ The clinical pattern of acute and chronic toxicity is different. Gastrointestinal 
symptoms occur early and neurological toxicity manifest late in acute toxicity. 
 
❏ Neurological findings (such as, tremors, clonus, and somnolence) often are 
presenting signs of chronic lithium toxicity and gastrointestinal symptoms may be 
absent.  
 
❏ Neither activated charcoal nor whole bowel irrigation (WBI) is indicated in the routine 
management of acute or chronic lithium toxicity.  
 
❏ Serial lithium concentrations should be obtained every 2 to 4 hours initially to 
determine the peak level and the need for dialysis.  
 
❏ Fluid hydration with crystalloid is essential to enhance the removal of lithium 
through the kidney. Diuretics are contraindicated.  
 
❏ We recommend dialysis for acute lithium concentrations >4 mEq/L (4 mmol/L), and 
chronic lithium concentrations >2.5 mEq/L (2.5 mmol/L), or for patients with signs of 
severe neurological toxicity regardless of the concentration. 
 
Core questions  
 
1. How does lithium work? 
2. What is the clinical presentation of lithium toxicity? 
3. List risk factors for toxicity in the setting of chronic lithium use. 
4. List 4 factors which impair renal filtration of Li 
5. List 2 disease states caused by Li 
6.  Describe the management of lithium toxicity. 
7. What are the indications for dialysis in a patient with lithium toxicity? 
 
 
 
Wisecracks:  
 
1. List 4 common clinical scenarios for Li toxicity and describe the clinical 
syndromes 
2. List the ECG changes potentially seen in lithium toxicity 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CrackCast Show Notes – Lithium – March 2018 
www.canadiem.org/crackcast 
Rosen’s In Perspective:  
 
Lithium was approved for the treatment of bipolar disorder in 1970, and it remains one 
of the most effective agents for both depressive and manic symptoms.  
 
“Lithium is a monovalent cation with a narrow therapeutic range, and significant toxicity can 
result when outside of this range.” 
 
Lithium largely has no effect when given in therapeutic doses to patients without 
mood disorders.  
 
“Lithium toxicity is nonspecific and may present in a manner similar to many systemic and 
neurologic disorders, so obtaining a history of use or ingestion is critical to making the 
diagnosis.” 
 
 
 
[1] How does lithium work? 
 
 
In spite of long-term therapeutic use, the mechanism by which lithium acts is still not fully 
understood. Its efficacy in the treatment of psychiatric illnesses is thought to be due to the 
modulation of neurotransmitters, which has downstream effects through cell signaling and 
molecular mechanisms. 
 
 
 
[2] What is the clinical presentation of lithium toxicity? 
 
Lithium is rapidly absorbed from the gastrointestinal tract and peaks in the serum 1 to 
2 hours after ingestion of immediate release preparation and 4 to 5 hours with 
sustained release preparations.  
 
“In overdose situations, absorption and peak concentrations may be delayed. Once 
absorbed, lithium enters the serum followed by a delayed distribution to the tissues.” 
 
Lithium is NOT metabolised (it's a metal) and is excreted unchanged in the urine.  
 
Unless the patient intentionally overdoses, most toxicity occurs in the setting of acute 
or chronic intravascular volume depletion or renal impairment  
 
The classic presentation of significant lithium toxicity comprises altered mental 
status; tremors; hyperreflexia, clonus, or fasciculations; and vomiting or diarrhea.  
 
However, clinical features of lithium toxicity depend on whether it is acute or chronic in 
nature (Table 154.1). Thus, evaluation of the potentially lithium toxic patient requires 
 
 
CrackCast Show Notes – Lithium – March 2018 
www.canadiem.org/crackcast 
knowledge of whether the patient was previously taking lithium, the timing of the last dose, 
and the amount of drug ingested.  
 
Acute toxicity  = GI symptoms predominate 
● Patient wasn’t on lithium and wanted to OD on it 
Chronic toxicity = neurologic symptoms predominate 
●  an increase in serum levels of lithium in a patient who is regularly taking lithium. This 
can either be from reduced excretion, renal insufficiency, or dose adjustment (either 
by a clinician or by the patient). Chronic lithium toxicity causes predominantly 
neurological symptoms.  
● Acute-on-chronic toxicity occurs when a patient with a stable steady-state lithium 
level takes a substantial additional amount of lithium, whether intentional or 
accidental. These patients present with a combination of both acute and chronic 
toxicity signs and symptoms. Either acute or chronic toxicity can result in cardiac 
conduction abnormalities or bradycardia;   
 
Table 154.1: Clinical Features of Lithium Toxicity  
 
CLINICAL 
FEATURES 
TYPE OF TOXICITY 
ACUTE 
CHRONIC 
Gastrointestinal1 
Nausea 
Vomiting 
Diarrhea 
Mild or nonexistent 
Neurological11,12 
Similar to chronic toxicity, occurs several 
hours after lithium distribution to the brain 
Tremors 
Clonus 
Hyperreflexia 
Somnolence 
Extrapyramidal 
symptoms 
Coma 
Seizures 
Cardiac13-14 
Sinus node dysfunction 
AV blockade 
Brugada pattern on ECG 
Ischemic changes on ECG 
QTc prolongation 
AV, Atrioventricular; ECG, electrocardiogram. 
 
 
Mnemonic time: 
❏ Leukostasis 
❏ Insipidus 
❏ Tremor / teratogen 
❏ Hypothyroidism 
❏ Increased weight 
 
 
CrackCast Show Notes – Lithium – March 2018 
www.canadiem.org/crackcast 
❏ Vomiting ? nausea 
❏ Myocardium = ecg changes 
❏ Serotonin syndrome / nms like effect 
 
[3] List risk factors for toxicity in the setting of chronic lithium 
use. 
 
● Nephrogenic DI 
● Renal impairment 
● Acute illness  
● Diuretic use, NSAIDS, ACE/ARB drugs  
● Dementia  
● Increased age 
● SILENT: cerebellar findings with pseudodementia 
 
 
[4] List 4 factors which impair renal filtration of Lithium 
 
● Volume depletion  
● Kidney injury 
● Nephrogenic DI 
● Diuretic use 
 
 
 
[5] List 2 disease states caused by Lithium 
 
Here’s a bunch:  
● nephrogenic diabetes insipidus  
● Hypothyroidism (and hyperthyroidism)  
○ Both of these conditions are reversible with discontinuation of the 
medication and respond well to conventional management. 
● Hypercalcemia and hyperparathyroidism also can occur and reverse upon 
discontinuation of lithium.  
● Patients chronically taking lithium can develop the syndrome of irreversible 
lithium-effectuated neurotoxicity (SILENT). Patients with SILENT will often have 
persistent cerebellar and brainstem dysfunction, dementia, and extrapyramidal signs 
even after lithium use has been discontinued for more than 2 months.  
 
 
 
[6] Describe the management of lithium toxicity. 
 
Think about other ingestants or your ddx: 
● Toxins: 
 
 
CrackCast Show Notes – Lithium – March 2018 
www.canadiem.org/crackcast 
○ Salicylates, iron, ASA, acetaminophen, substance withdrawal, serotonin 
syndrome!  
 
“Lithium concentrations should be obtained in all patients who are taking lithium, or have 
access to lithium, and present with potential toxicity. Because of the insidious and 
nonspecific nature of chronic lithium toxicity, a serum lithium level is also advisable in 
patients who are on lithium maintenance, regardless of their reason for presentation (normal 
levels 0.6 - 1.2 mmol/L)”  
 
Box 154.1: Diagnostic Testing For Lithium:  
• 
Serum lithium level 
• 
Serum electrolytes 
• 
Electrocardiogram (ECG) 
• 
If the clinical picture dictates: 
o Acetaminophen/salicylate levels 
o Thyroid function tests 
 
 
No specific antidote exists for lithium toxicity, and activated charcoal does not bind 
lithium.  
 
Supportive care and enhanced elimination are the mainstays of treatment. Because 
lithium is primarily excreted unchanged by the kidney, intravenous crystalloid should 
be administered early.  
 
Most patients who are lithium-toxic are dehydrated because of gastrointestinal losses 
in acute toxicity or from underlying dehydration leading to chronic toxicity.  
 
Crystalloid should be infused as a 1 L bolus followed by a continuous infusion at 
150% of the calculated maintenance rate if there are no contraindications, such as 
congestive heart failure.  
 
Diuretics are contraindicated, because they can cause worsening dehydration and 
reabsorption of lithium. Electrolyte abnormalities, if significant, should be corrected.  
 
 
We do not recommend the use of whole bowel irrigation (WBI) in routine lithium 
ingestions. “ - Rosen’s 
 
 
 
[7] What are the indications for dialysis in a patient with lithium 
toxicity? 
 
Lithium is highly dialyzable and dialysis is indicated for patients exhibiting signs of 
severe lithium toxicity  
 
 
 
CrackCast Show Notes – Lithium – March 2018 
www.canadiem.org/crackcast 
Dialysis can remove lithium at a rate five to seven times the rate of typical renal 
elimination.  
 
Box 154.2: Indications For Dialysis in Lithium Poisoned Patients  
1. Severely symptomatic patients 
2. Unable to tolerate fluid hydration 
3. Renal impairment 
4. Acute toxicity: Levels above 4 mEq/L 
5. Chronic toxicity: Levels above 2.5 mEq/L 
 
 
 
 
Wisecracks:  
[1] List 4 common clinical scenarios for Li toxicity and 
describe the clinical syndromes 
 
● Acute toxicity 
○  a recent ingestion in a patient who is not therapeutically taking 
lithium.  
○ Acute toxicity typically manifests with gastrointestinal symptoms 
such as vomiting and diarrhea and can mimic many other 
disease states.  
○ Neurologic consequences of an acute lithium overdose (such as, 
altered mental status and seizures) occur several hours later after 
lithium redistributes to the brain, but in some cases where lithium has 
delayed-release properties, this can occur even 12 or more hours after 
ingestion.  
○ May have cardiac toxicity  
● Acute on chronic toxicity  
○ Overlap of GI, Neuro, and cardiotoxicity (AV blockade, qtc prolonged, 
ischemic changes)   
● Chronic toxicity (reduced excretion, renal insufficiency, dose adjustment 
(either by a clinician or by the patient). 
○ predominantly neurological symptoms = ataxia, EPS, tremors, 
seizures, coma/somnolence. 
● Lithium has also been implicated in serotonin syndrome when combined 
with other drugs, such as monoamine oxidase (MAO) inhibitors, selective 
serotonin reuptake inhibitor (SSRIs), dextromethorphan, and meperidine.  
 
 
 Any changes in renal excretion due to conditions such as dehydration, 
hyponatremia, or renal dysfunction will lead to increases in serum lithium levels. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CrackCast Show Notes – Lithium – March 2018 
www.canadiem.org/crackcast 
[2] List the ECG changes potentially seen in lithium toxicity 
 
These are usually seen in acute overdose 
 
❏ Bradycardia 
❏ Junctional rhythm / AV blockade  
❏ ST changes 
❏ QT prolongation 
❏ Flattened or inverted T-waves 
❏ Brugada pattern on ECG 
❏ Ischemic changes on ECG 
 
