# Metadata
- topic: 3.4 - Vascular System - CCE084.HTN_
- source_folder: 3.4 - Vascular System
- original_file: CCE084.HTN_.pdf

CrackCast Show Notes – Hypertension – June 2017 
www.canadiem.org/crackcast 
 
 
Chapter 84 – Hypertension 
 
Episode Overview:  
  
1) Define the three classes of hypertension relevant to emergency medicine practice  
2) List 10 possible etiologies for hypertension. 
3) What is the pathophysiology of target-organ damage? 
4) How does hypertensive encephalopathy occur? 
5) List 6 hypertensive emergencies; their management goals; the optimal agents for BP 
control and any relevant caveats 
6) List five intravenous antihypertensive medications and their mechanism of action  
7) Describe the ER management of poorly controlled HTN 
  
Wisecracks:  
What are the management targets / indications for treatment in the following patients: 
1. 57 yo male with ICH and no signs of ↑ ICP. 
2. 39 yo female with SAH in the ED. 
3. 22 yo female with eclampsia. 
4. 66 yo female with ACS. 
5. 57 yo male with aortic dissection. 
6. 62 yo female with ICH, ↓ GCS, shift on CT scan. 
 
------------------------------------------------- 
   
Rosen’s in Perspective: 
  
• 
HTN is common, and is on the rise in prevalence 
• 
Definition:  
o 
> 140/90 in the general population 
§ 
Cut off of 135/85 mmHg in patients who have their BP measured 
using automated BP devices in a relaxed, quite, alone environment.  
o 
> 130/80 for people with chronic kidney disease or diabetes mellitus  
• 
Cardiovascular mortality doubles with each 20/10 mmHg rise above the normal 
115/75 
• 
There are definite differences in HTN incidence and morbidity between ethnic groups 
(African American patients being more affected)  
• 
Our job in the ED: 
o 
To differentiate between people with asymptomatic elevated BP from those 
with symptomatic elevated BP (acute vasculopathy)  
o 
Recent trends to shift away from cosmetic BP reduction, to focus on 
interventions based on actual clinical disease (e.g. end organ dysfunction).  
§ 
Hypertensive crisis, urgency, malignant HTN are now obsolete  
  
 
 
1) Define the three classes of hypertension relevant to emergency 
medicine practice  
 
i. 
Hypertensive emergency: “acute target-organ dysfunction, manifesting with newly 
developed clinical sequelae or consequential diagnostic test abnormalities” 
ii. 
Poorly controlled chronic HTN:  known HTN patient with asymptomatic elevated 
BP without end organ dysfunction 
CrackCast Show Notes – Hypertension – June 2017 
www.canadiem.org/crackcast 
 
 
a. Watch out for the following drugs as they can muddy the waters by increasing 
BP: NSAIDS/steroids/decongestants/appetite suppressants/over-the-counter 
stimulants/oral contraceptives/TCAs or rebound from short-acting 
antihypertensives (eg clonidine) 
iii. 
Elevated BP without prior history of HTN: can’t be diagnosed with HTN in Ed 
(think white coat) but 70% of these patients go on the be diagnosed after appropriate 
w/o by GP or outpatient clinic 
 
 
2) List 10 possible etiologies for hypertension. 
  
• 
Remember that hypertension - is either primary or secondary.  
• 
We always need to think “why” are they HTNsive: 
  
Here are some secondary causes:  
 
 
  
3) What is the pathophysiology of target-organ damage? 
 
● Macrocirculation 
○ High SVR (due to peripheral arteriole back up from SNS and RAAS 
activation) increase LV mass 
○ LVH - Diastolic dysfunction 
○ Elevated LA end diastolic pressures 
■ Acute SVR rise = Flash pulmonary edema 
CrackCast Show Notes – Hypertension – June 2017 
www.canadiem.org/crackcast 
 
 
■ Chronic = leads to LVH - leads to ischemia (outgrowing blood supply) 
and eventual thinning of myocardium 
○ Thus end with big floppy bag of systolic dysfunction 
 
● Microcirculation 
○ Critical luminal narrowing - occlusion and ischemia 
○ “Silent” ischemic episodes lead to primary cause of chronic end organ 
damage 
○ Lumen thinning - aneurysm and rupture 
■ Results in tissue edema, fibrinoid necrosis, and microangiopathic 
hemolytic anemia 
 
 
Now, Hypertensive emergencies get a little more crazy (typically pressures > 180/110) 
 
❏ Abrupt rise in pressure overwhelms autoregulation = endothelial injury 
❏ Post injury, a major vascular smooth muscle relaxant (Nitric Oxide) in decreased 
❏ This leads to further increase of SVR = downward spiral that maintains elevated BP 
❏ Left unchecked, this leads to terminal arteriole dilation and rupture = badness 
 
4) How does hypertensive encephalopathy occur? 
 
THIS IS A TRUE EMERGENCY!!!!  
 
§ 
People presenting with severe headaches, vomiting, altered mental status, seizures, 
coma, blurred vision, neurologic deficits in multiple nerve distributions (due to diffuse 
cerebral dysfunction.  
§ 
These people have normal CT heads (or no new interval changes) + markedly 
elevated BPs + papilledema. BUT A REAL THING CALLED PRES. 
o Failure of autoregulation 
o Leads to vasospasm -> ischemia -> increased vascular permeability -> 
punctate hemorrhages -> interstitial edema 
 
NET RESULTS: Diffuse vasogenic cerebral edema. You worry about exploding heads with 
shifting Na too fast, this is the same thing in the end. Don’t let your patient’s heads blow up 
in front of you...(to exaggerate!)  
 
 
5) List 6 hypertensive emergencies; their management goals; the optimal 
agents for BP control and any relevant caveats  
 
First lets talk injury pattern: see 84-2: 
 
CrackCast Show Notes – Hypertension – June 2017 
www.canadiem.org/crackcast 
 
 
 
A couple caveats: 
● Symptoms like headache, epistaxis, dizziness in and of themselves DON’T in 
isolation mean that patient is having a hypertensive emergency!  
 
Next the meat and potatoes: 
 
 
 
CrackCast Show Notes – Hypertension – June 2017 
www.canadiem.org/crackcast 
 
 
 
A little more about ER diagnostics in the hypertensive patient (depending on clinical 
suspicions):  
● CBC (look for MAHA)  
● Metabolic panel with creatinine and GFR 
● Urine - for urine albumin to creatinine ratio and proteinuria / vs. active urine 
sediment? 
○ To assess for subclinical renal disease!  
● CXR 
● ECG 
○ +/- troponin / BNP***(many caveats!)  
● CT  
● Fundoscopic findings may be absent in up to 30% of people!  
 
Goal of this testing is to help further evaluation and future patient management.   
 
 
6) List five intravenous antihypertensive medications and their 
mechanism of action. 
 
 
 
7) Describe the ER management of poorly controlled HTN 
 
Depends on patient’s follow-up: 
❏ If they have a GP or internist = nothing to be done in ED 
❏ If they don’t have follow-up, Rosen’s suggest initiating antihypertensive agent and 
arranging follow-up is possible 
 
However, quote from Rosen’s : “Acute BP reduction in the ED provides absolutely no benefit 
to patients with chronic HTN and exposes them to unnecessary risk of potential 
hypoperfusion in regions where blood flow has been governed by long-standing 
autoregulation.” 
 
If non-compliant with meds: restart them. Arrange F/U. 
 
CrackCast Show Notes – Hypertension – June 2017 
www.canadiem.org/crackcast 
 
 
WiseCracks: 
 
1) What are the management targets / indications for treatment in the following 
patients: 
a. 57 yo male with ICH and no signs of ↑ ICP. 
 
i. 
According to Rosens: (based upon INTERACT and ATACH trials) 
SBP should be targeted between 160 and 180 mm Hg 
ii. 
According to ATACH II (SEE SGEM here) no benefit of aggressive 
management, so we will stick with SBP goal of 140 -179 
iii. 
“SGEM Bottom Line: Intensive blood pressure 
reduction (SBP 110-139 mm Hg) does not 
provide benefit over standard blood pressure 
reduction (SBP 140-179 mm Hg) in patients 
with acute intracerebral hemorrhage.” 
iv. 
Esmolol / labetalol / Nicardipine are good choices. NO donors (Nitro, 
Nitroprusside) should be avoided as they can increase ICP 
 
b. 58 yo female with acute ischemic stroke 
 
i. 
185/110 mm Hg if thrombolysis planned 
ii. 
220/120 mm Hg if no thrombolysis. NOTE: decrease BP by 15 % in 
24hrs gradually, otherwise can worsen ischemic penumbra  
 
c. 39 yo female with SAH in the ED. 
 
i. 
According to Wikiem here consensus guidelines: 
1. Avoid hypotension: Maintain MAP>80 (CPP of 60 as long as 
ICP<20) 
a. Give IVF / Give pressors if IVF ineffective 
ii. 
Hypertension: AHA/ASA has no formal recommendations but states 
that decreasing to SBP <160 is reasonable 
1. Rapid SBP lowering <140 has been advocated with early 
research showing improved functional outcome, but more 
recent work has found no difference between SBP <140 and 
<180 (our Neurosx usually say <150 mm Hg if unsecured) 
iii. 
Ensure appropriate pain control and sedation before adding 
antihypertensives 
iv. 
Discontinue/reverse all anticoagulation 
1. Coumadin → (Prothrombin complex conc or FFP) + vitamin K 
2. Aspirin → DDAVP 
3. Plavix → Platelets (controversial now with PATCH trial showing 
no benefit and possible harm) 
4. Dabigitran (Pradaxa) → Idarucizumab (Praxbind): 5 grams IV 
v. 
Nimodipine: Only CCB studied that has been shown to prevent 
vasospasm (associated with improved neuro outcomes and 
decreased cerebral infarction) 
1. Give 60mg q4hr PO or NGT only (never IV) within 96hr of 
symptom onset. NNT 13 to prevent one poor outcome 
2. Keep an eye on BP for fluctuations 
vi. 
Magneisum sulfate: Controversial; prevents vasospasm acting as 
CrackCast Show Notes – Hypertension – June 2017 
www.canadiem.org/crackcast 
 
 
NMDA antagonist and a calcium channel blocker; maintain between 2-
2.5 mmol/L 
vii. 
Seizure prophylaxis: Controversial; 3 day course may be preferable 
1. Phenytoin, levetiracetam, carbamazepine and phenobarb. 
Phenytoin can be associated with worse neurologic & cognitive 
outcome 
viii. 
Glucocorticoid therapy: Controversial; evidence suggests is neither 
beneficial nor harmful 
ix. 
Glycemic control: Controversial; consider sliding scale if long patient 
stay in ED while awaiting ICU bed 
x. 
Keep head of bed elevated 
xi. 
Aneurysm treatment 
xii. 
Surgical clipping and endovascular coiling are definitive treatment 
xiii. 
Antifibrinolytic - Controversial; if delayed aneurysmal treatment, 
consider short term therapy (<72 hrs) with TXA or aminocaproic acid 
 
d. 22 yo female with eclampsia. 
 
i. 
If they still have a baby inside, DELIVERY IS DEFINITIVE 
MANAGEMENT 
ii. 
Still can present post delivery 
iii. 
Aggressive BP management is Key, SBP <160 or until they stop 
seizing 
iv. 
Magnesium sulfate is first line therapy  
v. 
May need to add Hydralazine / labetalol  
vi. 
Can add Nicardipine if no effect 
 
e. 66 yo female with ACS. 
 
i. 
Don’t forget primary goal is reperfusion 
ii. 
Need to lower afterload / augmentation index (that peripheral BP pulse 
wave back to the central circulation) 
iii. 
Titrate to symptom resolution, avoid dropping beyond 120/80 
(increases complications) 
iv. 
NO donors (nitroglycerin infusion) are first line but don’t use with 
concurrent PDE5 inhibitors (Viagra, Cialis) 
v. 
Avoid betablockers in early treatment before reperfusion as can 
precipitate cardiogenic shock by dropping CO 
 
f. 
57 yo male with aortic dissection. 
 
i. 
THINK LOW AND SLOW 
ii. 
Goal is to drop Sheer force and wall tension IE HR / CO / SVR 
iii. 
In other words drop dP/dT (lv ejection sheer force over rate) 
iv. 
SBP <110 or titrate to mentation 
 
Check out this great EMCases post here 
 
As they put it: 
 
1st: Pain control to counter sympathetic contribution to elevated heart rate and blood pressure 
Fentanyl 25-50 mcg boluses 
CrackCast Show Notes – Hypertension – June 2017 
www.canadiem.org/crackcast 
 
 
2nd: HR control to a goal of 60 bpm  
Esmolol 0.5mg/kg bolus then 50-300 mcg/kg/min or Labetalol 10-20mg bolus then 0.5-2mg/min 
or  Warning: giving a vasodilator without concomitant reduction in ionotropy may cause 
progression of dissection 
3rd: BP control to a goal of SBP = 110 
Nitroprusside 0.25-0.5 mcg/kg/min then titrate or Nicardipine 5mg/hr Warning: Beware of 
pseudohypotension! of the bilateral BPs use the higher BP reading.  
 
g. 62 yo female with ICH, ↓ GCS, shift on CT scan. 
 
i. 
Standard herniation syndrome tx stuff 
1. HOB elevated 
2. Do not occlude vascular structures (collars / neck compression 
/ head midline) 
3. SBP 140-160 
4. MAP >80 or CPP >55 if measured ICP 
5. Treat w/ Mannitol or Hypertonic 
6. Hyperventilation to PCO2 30-35 
7. Neurosx Stat 
8. Reverse anticoags 
 
h. 55 yo female with multiple vague complaints (dizziness, headache, 
weakness, and hand numbness)  
 
i. 
According to Rosen’s there is NO evidence that acutely lowering BP in 
people with probably chronic HTN benefit from acute BP reduction.  
ii. 
Observe in a quiet area (...doesn’t anyone know of such a place in the 
ER?). Then reassess. There is not target BP that dictates a safe 
discharge, and acutely lowering the BP with a drug such as a 
hydralazine is “without rationale or benefit.” 
iii. 
R/O HTN Emergency or PRES (see LITFL post here ) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
