# Metadata
- topic: 3.6 - GU and Gyne - CCE098-STIs
- source_folder: 3.6 - GU and Gyne
- original_file: CCE098-STIs.pdf

CrackCast Show Notes – Sexually Transmitted Infections – August 2017 
www.canadiem.org/crackcast 
 
 
Chapter 98 – Sexually Transmitted Infections 
 
Episode Overview: 
 
1. List 6 causes of each of the following:  
a. Genital ulcers 
b. Genital discharge 
c. Epithelial cell lesions 
d. Ectoparasites 
2. List the differential diagnosis of painful and painless genital lesions. 
3. Differentiate between primary and recurrent herpes infection 
4. List 4 techniques for the diagnosis of herpes and how it is managed? 
5. List 3 complications of herpes infection 
6. What are the clinical stages/phases of syphilis? How do you diagnose syphilis? How 
are the phases managed? 
7. What is the causes of chancroid? How is it managed? 
8. List the treatment options for & complications of chlamydia and gonorrhea infections  
9. Compare differences in presentation and treatment (table 88.3) between 
Trichomonas, BV, and Candidiasis, and Non-gonococcal urethritis. 
10. List 5 risk factors for PID 
11. List clinical findings that support a diagnosis of PID as described by the CDC 
12. Describe inpatient and outpatient treatment regimens for PID 
13. List factors which favor admission in PID 
14. What are some treatment options for condylomata acuminata (genital warts)? 
15. What is molluscum contagiosum and how is it managed? 
16. Describe the diagnosis and management of ectoparasites (pediculosis pubis and 
scabies). 
a. Pediculosis pubis: Parasitic infection caused by Phthirus pubis. 
b. Scabies: Sarcoptes scabiei is the mite responsible for scabies. 
 
Wisecracks:  
 
1. What is a Jarisch-Herxheimer reaction? 
2. What is the specific pathogenic cause of 
a. Syphilis 
b. LGV 
c. Chancroid 
d. Granuloma inguinale (Donovanosis :( ….the worst) 
 
Questions:  
1. List 6 causes of each of the following: (table 88.1)  
c. Genital ulcers 
i. 
Genital herpes 
ii. 
Primary syphilis 
iii. 
Chancroid 
iv. 
Lymphogranuloma venereum (rare) 
v. 
Granuloma inguinale (rare) 
CrackCast Show Notes – Sexually Transmitted Infections – August 2017 
www.canadiem.org/crackcast 
 
 
vi. 
Neoplasm/Trauma 
d. Genital discharge 
i. 
Gonorrhea 
ii. 
Chlamydia 
iii. 
Nongonococcal urethritis (NGU) 
iv. 
Pelvic inflammatory disease (PID) 
v. 
Trichomoniasis 
vi. 
Bacterial vaginosis 
e. Epithelial cell lesions 
i. 
Genital warts 
ii. 
Secondary syphilis 
iii. 
Molluscum contagiosum 
iv. 
Neoplasm 
v. 
Nevi 
vi. 
Skin tags 
f. Ectoparasites 
i. 
Pubic lice 
ii. 
Scabies 
iii. 
Body/Head lice 
iv. 
Mites (chiggers) 
v. 
Ticks 
  
2. List the differential diagnosis of painful and painless genital lesions.**** 
a. Painful 
i. 
Genital herpes 
ii. 
Chancroid 
iii. 
Behcet's syndrome  
b. Painless 
i. 
Syphilis 
ii. 
Lymphogranuloma venereum 
iii. 
Granuloma inguinale 
  
3. Differentiate between primary and recurrent herpes infection 
 
Genital Herpes 
Infection  
Primary 
Secondary 
Etiology 
Infection with HSV-1 or HSV-2 in absence 
of pre-existing antibodies.  
Reactivation of latent infection. 
More common with HSV-2 than 
HSV-1. 
 
Often secondary to variety of 
stressors including acute 
illness/injury, immunosuppression, 
physiologic stress, and menses. 
Symptoms 
Cluster of erythematous, painful lesions, 
which quickly ulcerate (external genitalia, 
Generally less symptomatic with 
lesions occurring in the same 
CrackCast Show Notes – Sexually Transmitted Infections – August 2017 
www.canadiem.org/crackcast 
 
 
perineum, buttocks, rectum, and 
oropharynx).  
 
Dysuria is common secondary to 
proximity of lesions to the urethra.  
 
Generally more painful and symptomatic 
with tender regional lymphadenopathy, 
fever, headache and malaise +/- other 
systemic symptoms.  
distribution due to reactivation of 
latent infection in the affected nerve 
roots.   
 
Prodromal symptoms of itching, 
burning, and paresthesias common 
prior to development and skin and 
mucosal lesions. 
 
 
Duration 
Generally lasts 2-4 weeks if untreated 
before spontaneous resolve.  
Generally shorter duration than 
primary with decreasing frequency 
and severity over time.  
   
   
4. List 4 techniques for the diagnosis of herpes; how is it managed? 
a. Clinical: History of similar lesions in same distribution supports clinical 
diagnosis though insensitive and nonspecific.  
b. PCR diagnostic test of choice - highest Sn/Sp in presence of active lesions. 
c. Direct fluorescent antibody (DFA) 
d. Serology for HSV 
 
 
*Consider dark-field microscopy and serologic testing for syphilis to help differentiate 
the two. Cytologic testing is insensitive and nonspecific an should not be relied upon 
to make diagnosis of HSV. 
 
Management: See Table 88.2.  
 
1) Not curative, but decrease duration, severity and the development of 
complicated infection (especially when initiated in first 72 hours). Majority 
managed with oral as outpatient - parenteral if systemic complications.   
2) Daily antiviral therapy will decrease the frequency while being taken but does 
not affect frequency or severity once discontinued. 
3) Topical antiviral therapy not recommended.     
 
Example regimens: 
Primary: Acyclovir 400 mg PO TID x 7-10 days 
    Valacyclovir 1000 mg PO BID x 7-10 days 
 
Secondary: Acyclovir 400 mg PO TID x 5 days 
         Valacyclovir 1000 mg PO daily daily x 5 days 
 
5. List 3 complications of herpes infection 
a. Meningoencephalitis 
b. Hepatitis or Pneumonitis 
c. Disseminated infection 
CrackCast Show Notes – Sexually Transmitted Infections – August 2017 
www.canadiem.org/crackcast 
 
 
  
6. What are the clinical stages/phases of syphilis? How do you diagnose 
syphilis? How are the phases managed? 
 
Syphilis 
Manifestation 
Primary 
Painless papule at the site of inoculation → ulceration forming chancre 
(relatively painless, clean based ulcer with well demarcated, indurated 
edges 1-2 cm in size). 
 
Non-tender regional lymphadenopathy may be seen. Often in genital or 
perianal region but may be present in oropharynx, breast, or hands etc.    
Secondary 
Presents in ~25% of patients with primary infection over weeks → months. 
 
Rash - diffuse and highly variable. 
 
Generalized lymphadenopathy - diffuse, rubbery and non-tender. 
*Epitrochlear adenopathy particularly suggestive.   
 
Mucous membrane lesions - multiple shallow erosions of oropharyngeal 
mucosa. Condylomata lata resemble genital warts and are broad based 
papular lesions.   
 
Systemic symptoms - low-grade fever, anorexia, headache, malaise, 
myalgias, and weight loss.  
Latent 
Serologic evidence in absence of clinical signs or symptoms. 
 
<12 months - early latent (infectious). 
 
>12 months - late latent (non-infectious with the exception of pregnant 
patients).   
Tertiary  
Cardiovascular and gummatous disease (uncommon) including aortitis, 
aortic aneurysm, and gummatous lesions of the skin, bone, and other 
organs.  
 
Diagnosis: Treponema pallidum is the spirochete that causes syphilis. Fastidious organism 
and cannot be cultured in the laboratory. Confirmed with dark field microscopy or serologic 
testing (non-treponemal VDRL/RPR and treponemal FTA-ABS/MHA-TP). 
 
Dark field microscopy - visualization of spirochete obtained from chancre provides spot 
diagnosis. Limited by specialized laboratory equipment, proper specimen collection, and 
experience of the microscopist. 
 
Non-treponemal test VDRL/RPR - utilized for screening purposes providing quantitative 
measurements of nonspecific antibodies produced in response to infection with T. pallidum. 
Sn 70-80% in primary and rises to nearly 100% in secondary infection.  
 
CrackCast Show Notes – Sexually Transmitted Infections – August 2017 
www.canadiem.org/crackcast 
 
 
Treponemal test FTA-ABS/MHA-TP - utilized to confirm the diagnosis in context of positive 
non-treponemal result *always confirmed following initial positive study*. Provide qualitative 
measurements of specific antitreponemal antibodies. Highly specific and may remain 
positive even after successful treatment and cure. 
 
Management: Benzathine Penicillin G 2.4 million units IM single dose in primary, secondary, 
and early latent syphilis and generally curative. Penicillin allergy - Doxy/Tetracycline x 2/52. 
 
Penicillin remains drug of choice in pregnancy, neurosyphilis, and congenital syphilis, even 
in the presence of penicillin allergy. Admission for desensitization and treatment.                  
 
 
7. What is the causes of chancroid? How is it managed? 
 
Chancroid - Ulcerating infection caused by gram-negative organism Haemophilus ducreyi. 
Common in developing world but extremely uncommon in Western world.  
 
Incubation of less than a week preceded by tender erythematous papule that rapidly 
ulcerates to form multiple, irregular, inflamed, painful, and ‘dirty’ ulcers. Painful inguinal 
lymphadenopathy is common.     
 
Management: Ceftriaxone 250 mg IM single dose. 
 
 
 Azithromycin 1000 mg PO single dose. 
 
 
 Ciprofloxacin 500 mg PO BID x 3 days.  
 
8. List the treatment options for & complications of chlamydia and gonorrhea 
infections (table 88.3) 
a. Chlamydia (urethritis, cervicitis, proctitis, pharyngitis) 
i. 
Azithromycin 1 g PO single dose or Doxycycline 100 mg PO BID x 7 
days. 
b. Gonorrhea (urethritis, cervicitis, proctitis, pharyngitis) 
i. 
Ceftriaxone 250 mg IM single dose plus Azithromycin 1 g PO single 
dose. 
c. What makes an STI “complicated”: list three conditions (table 88.4) 
i. 
Disseminated gonorrhea 
ii. 
Gonococcal conjunctivitis 
iii. 
Epididymitis/orchitis 
  
9. Compare differences in presentation and treatment (table 88.3) between 
Trichomonas, BV, and Candidiasis, and Nongonococcal urethritis. 
 
 
Presentation 
Physical exam 
Treatment 
Trichomonas 
Females - vaginal 
discharge, pruritus, dysuria, 
urinary frequency, 
dyspareunia, and postcoital 
bleeding. 
 
Females - erythema 
of vaginal mucosa 
and vulva, in addition 
to the discharge. 
Punctate hemorrhage 
(strawberry cervix is 
Metronidazole 2 g PO single 
dose. 
 
Tinidazole 2 g PO single 
dose. 
CrackCast Show Notes – Sexually Transmitted Infections – August 2017 
www.canadiem.org/crackcast 
 
 
Males - often asymptomatic 
but may cause dysuria and 
urethral discharge.  
seen in 10% of 
patients. 
 
Bacterial 
vaginosis 
Often asymptomatic though 
women may experience a 
malodorous, thin whitish 
vaginal discharge. Fishy 
odour is often reported.   
Fishy odour 
accentuated with 
addition of 10% KOH 
solution to wet mount 
slide (whiff test).  
Metronidazole 500 mg PO 
BID x 7 days. 
 
Metronidazole gel 0.75%    
5 g intravaginally once daily 
x 5 days. 
 
Clindamycin cream 2% 5 g 
intravaginally qhs x 7 days. 
Vulvovaginal 
candidiasis 
Common nonspecific 
findings of pruritus, 
abnormal discharge, 
dyspareunia, and external 
dysuria.  
Vulvar erythema and 
edema with satellite 
lesions, erythema of 
the vaginal mucosa, 
and a thick curdy 
whitish vaginal 
discharge.  
Fluconazole 150 mg PO 
single dose. 
 
Topical OTC antifungal x 7 
day course (clotrimazole, 
miconazole, butoconazole).   
Nongonococcal 
urethritis 
Patients often 
asymptomatic. When 
present, often less 
prominent than those with 
gonococcal urethritis.   
Clinical features are 
not sufficiently 
specific to distinguish 
NGU from 
gonococcal urethritis 
and coinfection is 
common.   
Azithromycin 1 g PO single 
dose plus 
Ceftriaxone 250 mg Im 
single dose when gonorrhea 
has not been ruled out with 
negative NAATs. 
 
Metronidazole 2 g PO single 
dose recommended for 
cases of trichomonas.  
 
  
10. List 5 RFs for PID 
a. Multiple sexual partners 
b. Age <25 
 
c. Partner with an STI 
d. History of STI  
e. History of PID 
 
11. List clinical findings that support a diagnosis of PID as described by the CDC 
Diagnosis should be considered and presumptive treatment initiated in any sexually active 
woman at risk for STD’s who presents with lower abdominal or pelvic pain and one or more 
of the following findings on pelvic examination: 
a. Cervical motion tenderness or 
b. Uterine tenderness or 
c. Adnexal tenderness 
 
*Additional criteria on Table 88.5 improves specificity but decreases the diagnostic 
sensitivity.  
CrackCast Show Notes – Sexually Transmitted Infections – August 2017 
www.canadiem.org/crackcast 
 
 
12. Describe inpatient and outpatient treatment regimens for PID 
a. Inpatient: 
i. 
CefoXAtan 2 g IV q6-12h plus Doxycycline 100 mg PO/IV q12h x 10 
days. 
ii. 
Clindamycin 900 mg IV q8h plus Gentamicin 2mg/kg IV load then 
1.5mg/kg q8h 
b. Outpatient: 
i. 
Ceftriaxone 250 mg IM single dose plus Doxycycline 100 mg PO BID 
x 14 days. +/- Metronidazole 500 mg PO BID x 14 days. 
 
* Sexual intercourse should be deferred until symptoms have resolved and antibiotic therapy 
has been completed by the patient and her partner.  
 
13. List factors which favor admission in PID 
a. Surgical emergencies cannot be excluded 
b. Pregnancy  
c. Tubo-ovarian abscess 
d. Severe illness, nausea, vomiting, or high fever 
e. Inability to follow or tolerate outpatient regimens. 
f. 
Failure to respond to oral therapy  
  
14. What are some treatment options for condylomata acuminate (genital warts)? 
a. Patient applied 
i. 
Imiquimod cream 
ii. 
Podofilox solution or gel 
iii. 
Sinecatechins ointment 
b. Provider administered 
i. 
Surgical excision 
ii. 
Cryotherapy 
iii. 
Topical therapy with trichloroacetic acid (TCA) or bichloroacetic acid 
(BCA) 
 
15. What is molluscum contagiosum; how is it managed? 
a. Localized skin infection presenting with one or more 2-5 mm papules with 
waxy appearance, and central umbilication. 
b. Spontaneous resolution typical in 6-12 months. Patients may seek primary 
care or dermatologic follow up for curettage, cryotherapy, or treatment with 
topical agents for persistent lesions. 
     
16. Describe the diagnosis and management of ectoparasites (pediculosis pubis 
and scabies). 
a. Pediculosis pubis: Parasitic infection caused by Phthirus pubis. 
i. 
Diagnosis - visual inspection of lice present within the pubic hair or 
attached to the skin when feeding. The eggs (nits) are attached to the 
shaft of the pubic hairs.  
ii. 
Management - topical permethrin 1% creams and rinses available 
OTC to be applied to the affected area and washed off after 10 
CrackCast Show Notes – Sexually Transmitted Infections – August 2017 
www.canadiem.org/crackcast 
 
 
minutes. Resistance may require alternative topical agents or oral 
ivermectin.  
b. Scabies: Sarcoptes scabiei is the mite responsible for scabies. 
i. 
Diagnosis - visual inspection often reveals characteristic burrows in 
the skin. Excoriations, papules, and nodules are frequently seen in the 
groin, genitalia, axilla, and interdigital web spaces. Diagnosis may be 
confirmed by microscopic examination of scrapings from characteristic 
skin lesions, which reveals the mites.     
ii. 
Management -  topical permethrin 5% cream applied topically and 
washed off after 8-14 hours. Alternative agents include topical benzyl 
benzoate, topical lindane, or oral ivermectin. 
 
*Potentially affected clothing and linen should be washed in hot water with detergent.   
 
Wisecracks:  
 
1. What is a Jarisch-Herxheimer reaction? 
a. Acute worsening of symptoms that may develop after initiation of antimicrobial 
therapy for syphilis. Typically increased malaise, myalgias, and fever within 
24 hours of treatment. Thought to be secondary to sudden lysis of 
spirochetes, but the mechanism is poorly understood. 
 
*Making patients aware of this common self-limited phenomenon may prevent a 
return visit to the ED. 
    
2.  What is the specific pathogenic cause of 
a. Syphilis 
i. 
Treponema pallidum  
b. LGV 
i. 
Chlamydia trachomatis (L1, L2, and L3 serovars) 
c. Chancroid 
i. 
Haemophilus ducreyi  
d. Granuloma inguinale (Donovanosis :( ….the worst) 
i. 
Klebsiella granulomatosis 
 
 
 
