# Metadata
- topic: 4.2 - Toxicology - CCE152-CV-Drugs
- source_folder: 4.2 - Toxicology
- original_file: CCE152-CV-Drugs.pdf

CrackCast Show Notes – Cardiovascular Drugs – February 2018 
www.canadiem.org/crackcast 
 
 
 
Episode 152 (Ch. 147 9th) – Cardiovascular Drugs 
 
Episode Overview: 
 
Cardioactive steroids = e.g. digitalis and plants 
1. How does digoxin work (mechanism of action)? 
2. How does digoxin toxicity present clinically? 
3. Compare acute vs chronic digoxin toxicity 
4. What are the risk factors for chronic digoxin toxicity? 
5. What types of ECG findings are associated with digoxin toxicity? (List 3 
dysrhythmias specific to digoxin toxicity).  
6. Describe the management priorities in digoxin toxicity 
a. a. List 5 indications for DigiFab 
b. b. List 3 dosing strategies for DigiFab 
7. What other treatments should be considered in patients with digoxin toxicity? 
 
Beta adrenergic blockers 
1. Which β blockers have membrane stabilizing activity? Why is this important? 
2. Why is propranolol the most lethal β blocker? 
3. Describe the stepwise management of β blocker toxicity 
4. Which β blockers can be dialysed? 
 
Calcium Channel Blockers 
1. Describe the different mechanism of action of Dihydropyridines and Non-
dihydropyridines. How is this relevant to toxicology?  
2. Describe the stepwise management of CCB toxicity 
 
Clonidine 
1.  How does clonidine work? 
2.  How does clonidine toxicity present and how is it managed? 
 
Nitrates, Nitrites  
1. What are 2 common clinical presentations of Nitrate/Nitrite toxicity? 
2. How is nitrite poisoning managed?  
 
Wisecracks 
1. List 6 differential diagnoses for the “slow + low” patient 
2. List 6 non-cardiac symptoms of cardioactive steroid intoxication  
3. List three plants containing cardiac glycosides 
4. Contrast adult vs. pediatric age differences in digoxin intoxication 
5. What are the clinical differences in presentation between β blocker, CCB and digoxin 
toxicity? 
 
 
 
CrackCast Show Notes – Cardiovascular Drugs – February 2018 
www.canadiem.org/crackcast 
 
 
 
Welcome! This episode we’ll be covering five major groups of cardiovascular drugs:  
● Cardioactive steroids = e.g. digitalis and plants 
● Beta adrenergic blockers 
● CCB’s 
● Clonidine 
● Nitrates, Nitrites  
 
KEY CONCEPTS 
 
Cardioactive Steroids  
❏ Digoxin toxicity is often occult and should be considered in any patient who is on 
digoxin and presents with gastrointestinal or visual disturbance and a new 
dysrhythmia or conduction disturbance. 
❏ Digi Fab is the specific antidote for digoxin toxicity and is dosed by body load of 
digoxin, not by body weight of the patient. 
❏ Indications for digitalis Fab are summarized in the episode (so stay tuned), and Fab 
should be used before pacing or antidysrhythmic drugs.  
❏ Hyperkalemia in acute digitalis toxicity is best treated with Fab fragments. 
Conventional treatment as for any other cause of hyperkalemia is also appropriate 
when Fab fragment preparations are not immediately available.  
 
Beta-Adrenergic Blockers  
❏ Beta-blocker intoxication usually causes bradydysrhythmias and occasionally AV 
block.  
❏ Noncardiac symptoms such as obtundation, seizures, and hypoglycemia may occur 
❏ Volume expansion, atropine, calcium, and glucagon, HDI/glucose infusion, pressors 
❏ When using HDI/glucose infusions, concentrate glucose solutions to avoid fluid 
overload.  
 
Calcium Channel Blockers  
❏ Signs and symptoms of calcium channel blocker intoxication often occur early after 
overdose but may be significantly delayed with sustained release products.  
❏ AV block and bradydysrhythmias predominate with verapamil and diltiazem; 
dihydropyridine calcium channel blockers may present with tachycardia.  
 
Clonidine  
❏ Clonidine poisoning may mimic opioid poisoning and is best treated with crystalloid 
fluids followed by an infusion of norepinephrine and narcan.  
 
Nitrates, Nitrites, and Methemoglobinemia  
❏ Nitrates are contraindicated in patients who have recently taken phosphodiesterase 
inhibitors for erectile dysfunction / pulmonary HTN. 
❏ Patients with a methemoglobin concentration of 25% and/or symptoms of anemia 
should be treated with methylene blue.  
 
CrackCast Show Notes – Cardiovascular Drugs – February 2018 
www.canadiem.org/crackcast 
 
 
 
Core questions:  
 
● Cardioactive steroids = e.g. digitalis and plants 
 
Digoxin is derived from the Balkan foxglove plant, Digitalis lanata.  
❏ Despite centuries of experience with digitalis, chronic and acute poisonings still 
occur.  
❏ Medication errors and toxic effects account for the most common causes (44%) of 
preventable iatrogenic cardiac arrests.  
 
 
1. How does digoxin work (mechanism of action)? 
 
● Increases inotropy (inhibition of membrane sodium-potassium–adenosine 
triphosphatase (Na+ ,K+ -ATPase), which increases intracellular sodium and 
extracellular potassium concentrations. This increase in intracellular sodium 
concentration results in dysfunction of the sodium-calcium ion exchanger, which 
normally extrudes intracellular calcium after systole. This subsequent increase in 
intracellular calcium concentration results in a larger amount of calcium pumped 
into the sarcoplasmic reticulum so that on calcium-induced calcium release during 
subsequent action potentials, a larger amount of calcium is released into the cell, 
causing a more powerful contraction and thus increased cardiac output.)  
○ Increase in intracellular Na+ and Calcium 
● Decreases SA and AV nodal conduction  
○ At toxic concentrations, digoxin can directly block the generation of impulses 
in the SA node, depress conduction through the AV node, and increase the 
sensitivity of the SA and AV nodes to catecholamines 
○ In toxicity gives tachy-brady/AV block syndromes 
● Purkinje effects:  
○ decreased resting potential, resulting in slowed phase 0 depolarization and 
conduction velocity; (2) decreased action potential duration, which increases 
sensitivity of muscle fibers to electrical stimuli; and (3) enhanced 
automaticity resulting from increased rate of phase 4 repolarization and 
delayed after-depolarizations. 
○ These mechanisms account for an increase in premature ventricular 
contractions, which is the most common electrocardiographic manifestation of 
digoxin toxicity. At extremes of toxicity, these effects result in a dangerous 
sensitivity to mechanical and electrical stimulation. Interventions with 
pacemaker wires, catheters, and cardioversion can result in asystole, 
ventricular tachycardia, and ventricular fibrillation. 
 
 
 
2. How does digoxin toxicity present clinically? 
 
CrackCast Show Notes – Cardiovascular Drugs – February 2018 
www.canadiem.org/crackcast 
 
 
 
● Chronic = nonspecific symptoms (see wisecracks) 
● Acute:  
○ No sign or symptom, including dysrhythmia, is unique to digoxin poisoning, 
so the differential diagnosis is broad.  
○ More likely Low and Slow  
○ Gastrointestinal symptoms - N/V and abdominal pain 
 
Non cardiac symptoms include: 
 
❏ General weakness 
❏ Headache 
❏ Dizziness 
❏ ALOC 
❏ Blurred “snowy” vision 
❏ Yellow-green halos 
❏ Scotomas 
❏ N/V/D 
❏ Abdominal Pain 
❏ Anorexia 
 
 
3. Compare acute vs chronic digoxin toxicity 
 
See Table 147.1 in Rosen’s 9th Edition. 
 
Chronic 
Acute 
Higher Mortality (LL50 6ng/ml) 
Lower mortality 
Ventricular Dysrhythmias more common 
Bradycardia and AV block more common 
Elderly 
Younger 
Underlying heart disease increases 
morbidity and mortality 
Absence of heart disease decreases 
morbidity and mortality 
 
○ The LL50 for acute intoxication is not known, but it is much higher, especially 
in children.  
○ The association of hyperkalemia with acute toxicity is obvious given the 
mechanism of digoxin; either hypokalemia or hyperkalemia may occur with 
chronic toxicity 
○ Children with healthy hearts can tolerate massive acute oral ingestions without 
Fab treatment. This excludes therapeutic errors, children who are taking 
digoxin therapeutically, and children with heart disease. Dosage calculation 
and administration errors account for more pediatric digoxin intoxication and 
death than accidental oral ingestion.  
 
 
4. What are the risk factors for chronic digoxin toxicity? 
CrackCast Show Notes – Cardiovascular Drugs – February 2018 
www.canadiem.org/crackcast 
 
 
 
These factors decrease elimination, and alter the pharmacodynamics of the drugs.  
 
• Renal Insufficiency 
• Heart Disease 
o Congenital 
o Ischemic 
o CHF 
o Myocarditis 
• Electrolyte Imbalance 
o Hypo/HyperK 
o HypoMg 
o HyperCa 
• Alkalosis 
• Hypothyroidism 
• Sympathomimetic Drugs 
• Cardiotoxic Co-ingestants 
o Beta-Blockers 
o CCBs 
o TCAs 
• Drug Interactions 
o Quinidine, Amiodarone 
o Verapamil, diltiazem, nifedipine 
o Erythromycin 
o Captopril 
• Elderly woman 
 
 
 
5. What types of EKG findings are associated with digoxin toxicity? (List 3 
dysrhythmias specific to digoxin toxicity).  
 
Digoxin can produce virtually any dysrhythmia or conduction block, and bradycardias are as 
common as tachycardias (Box 147.1).  
 
However, none is unique to digoxin, and because they can all occur in the setting of ischemic 
and other heart disease, digoxin toxicity remains a clinical rather than an 
electrocardiographic diagnosis.  
 
What rhythm is NOT associated with Dig toxicity = rapidly conducted SVTs (e.g. rapid 
a. fib).  
 
The specific ones! 
● Afib with AV dissociation (slow ventricular rate)  
● Atrial tachycardia with a block 
● Bidirectional VT 
● Junctional Tachycardia 
 
 
CrackCast Show Notes – Cardiovascular Drugs – February 2018 
www.canadiem.org/crackcast 
 
 
 
 
6. Describe the management priorities in digoxin toxicity 
 
The treatment of significant digoxin poisoning is the administration of digoxin-specific 
fragment antigen-binding (Fab) antibodies (DigiFab); all other interventions are considered 
complementary. 
a. a. List 5 indications for DigiFab 
 
In acute poisoning:  
● History:  
○ Other cardiac toxic drug ingestion - CCB, BB, TCA with shock 
○ Acute ingestion > 10 mg plus clinical toxicity 
○ Ingestion of plant containing cardioactive steroids plus dysrhythmias  
● Physical:  
○ Too fast and deadly:  unstable ventricular dysrhythmias (not PVCs) 
○ Too slow and deadly: unstable dysrhythmias (hemodynamic compromise) 
such as symptomatic sinus bradycardia, or second- or third-degree heart block 
unresponsive to atropine. 
○ Cardiac arrest  
● Labs: serum potassium level above 5.0 mEq/L (acute ingestion)  
○ Acute steady state > 13 nmol/L and one clinical sign 
○ Any serum level > 19 nmol/L (this is not a steady state level, will change after 
drug distributes) 
 
Fab fragment therapy should be used before transvenous pacing, because the latter is 
believed to carry risk of ventricular dysrhythmia, although the evidence for this is 
mixed. 
 
The peak level at 2 hrs is usually MUCH higher than the actual steady state level 
(suggest false toxicity).  
 
*Diagnosis and management rely heavily on serum digoxin concentrations, but it is the 
steady state (6-8 hrs after the dose/overdose), rather than peak concentration, that correlates 
with tissue toxicity and is used to calculate antidote dosages.  
 
b. b. List 3 dosing strategies for DigiFab 
 
● Empirically in the setting of cardiovascular collapse / arrest  - give 10-20 
(logistically restrained) vials 
● Based on steady-state digitoxin concentration  
● Based on ingested dose of digoxin or digitoxin  
 
See Boxes 147.5 and 147.7 for sample calculations. 
 
Reactions:  
● Sheep-derived digoxin antibodies, so people can develop:  
CrackCast Show Notes – Cardiovascular Drugs – February 2018 
www.canadiem.org/crackcast 
 
 
 
○ Allergic reactions (esp. asthmatics)  
○ Erythema, urticaria  
● Hypokalemia 
● CHF exacerbation  
● Increase ventricular rate/atrial fibrillation  
 
 
 
7. What other treatments should be considered in patients with digoxin toxicity? 
 
Here are the big points:  
1. Temporize bradycardia with atropine  
2. Watch the K+ (helps guide acute Fab treatment or chronic OD’s need 
repletion)  
3. Correct the Mg+ 
Temporizing measures while waiting for DigiFab  
4. Consider pacing and cardioversion (avoid if possible!) 
5. Consider Phenytoin or lidocaine for tachydysrhythmias 
 
● We recommend using atropine as a temporizing measure for patients with shock 
while Fab fragments are being administered. We also recommend atropine for 
bradycardia refractory to Fab fragments. Standard dosing (0.02 mg/kg in children 
with a minimum of 0.1 mg; 1 mg IV in adults) should be used. Doses can be repeated 
every 3 to 5 minutes. In general, an external or transvenous pacemaker should be 
readied once atropine has been administered. 
● Significant magnesium depletion is present or suspected (eg, electrocardiographic 
changes such as QTc prolongation are present), 1 to 2 g of magnesium sulfate 
should be administered over 10 to 20 minutes (child: 25 mg/kg), followed by a 
constant infusion of 1 to 2 g/hr until magnesium concentrations are normal (careful 
in renal failure; and NO in bradydysrhythmias) 
● Maintain K+ at 3.5-4 mmol/L (only in chronic toxicity)  
● Digoxin immune Fab fragments are the preferred therapy for dysrhythmias, but a 
dysrhythmia may require intervention while Fab fragments are readied, or to begin 
to show effect after infusion.  
 
Transvenous pacing has been a mainstay of treatment for several decades; however, there is 
some evidence that the catheter may induce ventricular tachydysrhythmias in a myocardium 
made irritable by digoxin, although convincing studies on this question are lacking. 
Iatrogenic accidents of cardiac pacing are frequent (36%) in one study and can be fatal (up 
to 13%). Transvenous pacing should be used only if external pacing fails. Pacing usually is 
required only temporarily while waiting for Fab fragments to take clinical effect. 
Cardioversion in the setting of digoxin poisoning should be reserved for life-threatening 
dysrhythmias such as tachydysrhythmias with profound refractory hypotension, unstable 
ventricular tachycardia, or ventricular fibrillation. 
 
CrackCast Show Notes – Cardiovascular Drugs – February 2018 
www.canadiem.org/crackcast 
 
 
 
Because most assays measure both bound and unbound drug, digoxin concentrations will 
be elevated for up to 1 week after Fab fragments administration, with values often greater 
than 100 ng/ mL once Fab fragments have been administered.  
 
 The significant protein binding and large volumes of distribution of digoxin suggest that 
hemodialysis, hemoperfusion, and exchange transfusion are ineffective. The long half-lives 
have therapeutic implications for temporizing measures such as pacemakers, atropine, and 
antidysrhythmic drugs compared to the more definitive treatment of Fab fragments. 
 
Plants with Digoxin in them!  
1) Common oleander 2) yellow oleander 3) Lily of the valley 4) Red squill 5) Foxglove 6) 
dog's bane 7) Milkweed 
 
--------------------------------------------- 
 
Beta adrenergic blockers 
 
 
Have B1 effects:  
Competitively inhibit endogenous catecholamines such as epinephrine at beta-adrenergic 
receptors, blocking the catecholamine effects of inotropy (increased myocardial contraction), 
dromotropy (enhanced cardiac conduction), and chronotropy (increased heart rate).  
 
Have B2 effects:  
Complex β2 effects include vascular (smooth muscle relaxation and vasodilation), liver 
(glycogenolysis, gluconeogenesis), lung (bronchodilation), adipose tissue (release of free 
fatty acids), and uterus (smooth muscle relaxation) effects.  
 
 
 
Which β blockers have intrinsic sympathomimetic activity? Why is this important? 
 
The intrinsic sympathomimetic activity of some beta-blockers such as pindolol, oxprenolol, 
acebutolol, and carteolol can lead to some unusual manifestations such as ventricular 
dysrhythmias and sinus tachycardia instead of bradycardia.  
● Can produce:  
○  torsades de pointes (Sotalol)  
○ QT prolongation, VT (Acebutolol)  
The first two on the “SANTA” mnemonic  
 
 
 
1. Which β blockers have membrane stabilizing activity? Why is this important? 
 
Propranolol, nadolol, and acebutolol have a membrane-stabilizing effect that impairs SA 
and AV node function and leads to bradycardia and AV block. Ventricular conduction is also 
depressed, leading to QRS widening, occasional ventricular dysrhythmias such as ventricular 
tachycardia and ventricular fibrillation, and cardiogenic shock.  
 
CrackCast Show Notes – Cardiovascular Drugs – February 2018 
www.canadiem.org/crackcast 
 
 
 
SAID simply….they BLOCK Na channels!  
 
 
 
2. Why is propranolol the most lethal βB? 
 
Much of propranolol’s unique toxicity derives from its:  
● Lipophilic nature which allows it to penetrate the CNS, causing obtundation, 
respiratory depression, and—with large overdoses—seizures.  
○ Seizures probably result from a combination of hypotension, hypoglycemia, 
hypoxia, and direct CNS toxicity including sodium-channel blockade.  
 
Other beta-blockers are not lipophilic and do not have these effects. Of note, bronchospasm is 
rarely a problem in cases of beta-blocker overdose, even with nonselective beta-blockers. The 
few cases of symptomatic bronchospasm respond to the usual bronchodilator nebulizations. 
 
Highly protein bound and lipophilic (can’t be dialysed).  
 
 
3. Describe the stepwise management of βB toxicity 
 
Immediate measures include IV fluids, supplemental oxygen, and monitoring of cardiac 
rhythm and respirations. 
 
Resuscitation sequence: 
● AC not recommended by Rosen’s (Jesse says this: AC may or may not be appropriate, 
consult your local toxicologist) 
● In hypotensive patients, bolus 20 to 40 mL/kg of normal saline or lactated Ringer’s 
● Temporize with IV atropine if HR < 50 bpm 
● Give 3-6 g Calcium Gluconate over ~15 mins for bradycardia and hypotension  
● Consider Glucagon:  
○ Glucagon has both inotropic and chronotropic effects and does not depend 
on beta-adrenergic receptors for its action; therefore, it has long been used 
for beta-blocker toxicity. It stimulates the production of intracellular cyclic 
adenosine monophosphate independently of the beta-adrenergic receptor. 
Furthermore, it helps counteract the hypoglycemia induced by beta-blocker 
overdose. Although not well studied, the initial dose of glucagon is a 5- to 10-
mg IV bolus (0.05 to 0.1 mg/kg for children). If a response occurs to 
glucagon, specifically if heart rate, blood pressure, or symptom improvement 
is observed, the “response dose” should be started as an infusion at a rate of 
the response dose administered over 1 hour.  
○ Can consider glucagon for patients with bradycardia or hypotension not 
responsive to crystalloid fluids, atropine, and an initial bolus of calcium.  
○ Usually an infusion is needed due to the 20 min half-life 
○ *thought to be a transient bridge to HDI therapy* 
● High dose insulin therapy:  
CrackCast Show Notes – Cardiovascular Drugs – February 2018 
www.canadiem.org/crackcast 
 
 
 
○ Despite glucagon’s longer history for treatment of beta-blocker toxicity, HDI 
is a superior therapy. HDI is not a vasopressor; it is a profound inotrope 
with vasodilating properties. The mechanism for HDI is not fully elucidated 
but probably involves both optimization of the use of carbohydrates for fuel by 
cardiac myocytes and modulation of intracellular calcium. HDI improves 
cardiac output significantly in beta-blocker toxicity from an increase in stroke 
volume more than heart rate. 
○ Dose range: 0.5 - 10 U/Kg/hr 
■ One “amp” of D50 should be administered followed by 1 U/kg of 
regular insulin as a loading dose. An infusion of 25 g/hr of 
concentrated glucose should be initiated in addition to an infusion of 
insulin at 1 U/kg/hr. The insulin infusion should be increased by 2 
U/kg/hr every 10 minutes until hypotension resolved or a maximum 
rate of 10 U/kg/hr is reached.  
○ Requires frequent glucose measurements (use dextrose to keep glucose > 
12)  
○ Replace K+ because of insulin shifting 
○ We recommend HDI for patients experiencing hypotension despite crystalloid 
fluid, atropine, and a single bolus of calcium and glucagon. We also 
recommend a central venous catheter and an arterial catheter be placed 
immediately upon the decision to initiate HDI. 
● Catecholamines (norepinephrine is preferred 1st line, then vasopressin) are 
indicated when mean arterial pressure (MAP) cannot be maintained at 60 mm Hg or 
above, despite use of crystalloid infusion, calcium, atropine, glucagon, and HDI. A 
single catecholamine of choice after HDI and glucagon has not emerged.  
● Pacemaker for refractory cases of bradycardia. A pacemaker is particularly 
useful when cardiac contractility is vigorous but bradycardia is Persistent. 
● Intralipid:  IFE is a reasonable therapy in beta-blocker overdose in patients with 
shock refractory to conventional treatments. We recommend IFE in patients with 
persistent bradycardia or hypotension not responding to IV fluids, calcium, HDI, 
and at least three vasopressors or inotropes at maximum recommended infusion 
rates. Dosing for IFE is also not universally agreed upon. We recommend an initial 
bolus of 1.5 mL/kg of 20% lipid solution given over 2 to 3 minutes, followed 
immediately by an infusion of 0.25 mL/kg/min. 
● ECMO: We recommend ECMO in cases where patients have hypotension refractory 
to HDI, at least three catecholamines, and IFE, or in cases with bradycardia 
unresponsive to inotropes and a pacemaker. 
 
● Specific cases:  
○ PROPRANOLOL:  
■ Bicarbonate should be dosed at 1 to 2 mEq/kg IV as a bolus repeated 
every 3 to 5 minutes until the QRS narrows to less than 120 ms.  
○ SOTALOL:  
CrackCast Show Notes – Cardiovascular Drugs – February 2018 
www.canadiem.org/crackcast 
 
 
 
■ Pulsatile ventricular tachycardia can most safely be treated with 
lidocaine. 
■ Pulseless VT  = defibrillation  
■ Overdrive pacing with isoproterenol or a pacemaker and magnesium 
sulfate are specific therapies for torsades de pointes. 
 
 
4. Which β blockers can be dialysed? 
 
SANTA can’t pee….. 
• Sotalol 
• Atenolol 
• Timolol 
• Acebutolol 
• Nadolol 
 
Hemodialysis or hemoperfusion may be beneficial for beta-blockers with lower Vd, lower 
protein binding, and greater hydrophilicity.  
 
 
 
CCB’s 
 
1. Describe the different mechanism of action of Dihydropyridines and Non-
dihydropyridines. How is this relevant to toxicology? 
 
Dihydropyridines: 
● Amlodipine 
● Nifedipine 
● Other “-pines”   
Non-dihydropyridines:  
● Verapamil 
● Diltiazem  
 
Calcium channel antagonists block the slow L-type calcium channels in the myocardium and 
vascular smooth muscle, leading to coronary and peripheral vasodilation. They also reduce 
cardiac contractility, depress SA nodal activity, and slow AV conduction.  
 
In cases of overdose, verapamil has the deadliest profile, combining severe myocardial 
depression and peripheral vasodilation. Both verapamil and diltiazem act on the heart and 
blood vessels, whereas dihydropyridine calcium channel blockers (such as nifedipine) 
cause primarily vasodilation and subsequent reflex tachycardia.  
 
IN TOXICOLOGY THIS DIFFERENTIATION IS NOT AS PRONOUNCED  
As with beta-blockers, selectivity is lost after overdose, and toxicity is fourfold; the calcium 
antagonists have negative effects on heart rate, contractility, conduction, and vascular tone, 
CrackCast Show Notes – Cardiovascular Drugs – February 2018 
www.canadiem.org/crackcast 
 
 
 
with the exception of dihydropyridine calcium channel blockers, which tend to result in 
tachycardia even in severe toxicity. 
 
 
2. Describe the stepwise management of CCB toxicity 
 
Very rapidly absorbed (usually within 30 mins)  
 
Flowsteps:  
1. MOVIE 
2. Fluid bolus for hypotension  
3. Temporizing measures:  
a. Atropine 
i. 
For symptomatic bradycardia < 50 bpm 
b. IV calcium  
i. 
3-6 g Calcium Gluconate over 15 mins; may be repeated 
4. High insulin glucose therapy 
a. Dose range: 0.5 - 10 U/Kg/hr 
i. 
One “amp” of D50 should be administered (if glucose <11) followed 
by 1 U/kg of regular insulin as a loading dose. An infusion of 25 g/hr 
of concentrated glucose should be initiated in addition to an infusion 
of insulin at 1 U/kg/hr. The insulin infusion should be increased by 2 
U/kg/hr every 10 minutes until hypotension resolves or a maximum 
rate of 10 U/kg/hr is reached.  
5. Vasopressors  
6. Stop-gap therapies:  
a. Methylene blue  
i. 
 Inhibits the enzyme guanylyl cyclase, resulting in decreased 
production of cyclic guanosine monophosphate (cGMP) and 
inhibition of endothelial smooth muscle relaxation, causing an 
increase in systemic vascular resistance.  
ii. 
Especially helpful for amlodipine toxicity  
iii. 
Consider use of methylene blue only as an alternative salvage 
therapy to ECMO when HDI, catecholamines, and IFE have failed. 
Dosing involves a 1- to 2-mg/kg bolus of a 1% methylene blue solution 
followed by an infusion of 1 mg/kg for up to 6 hours. 
b. Intralipid:  
i. 
Animal evidence exists that IFE may be effective especially for the 
treatment of verapamil toxicity. Human case reports exist of successful 
resuscitation of toxicity from diltiazem and verapamil. Dosing and 
indications are identical to those for beta-blocker toxicity. We 
recommend that IFE be used in patients with hypotension refractory to 
calcium, HDI, and three vasopressors. 
c. ECMO 
CrackCast Show Notes – Cardiovascular Drugs – February 2018 
www.canadiem.org/crackcast 
 
 
 
 
Things NOT recommended:  
● Do not recommend glucagon in calcium channel blocker poisoning. It has no 
mechanistic advantage over epinephrine, and no good evidence exists to support its 
use in calcium channel blocker poisoning 
 
High protein binding and Vd greater than 1 to 2 L/kg make hemodialysis or hemoperfusion 
ineffective. With sustained-release preparations, their half-lives are relatively short, generally 
limiting toxicity to 24 to 36 hours. 
 
 
 
Clonidine 
 
1.  How does clonidine work? 
 
Clonidine is a centrally acting α2-adrenergic agonist (its a sympatholytic) and imidazoline 
agonist initially approved by the FDA as a treatment for hypertension in 1974. Since that 
time, its use has expanded to treat conditions such as attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder 
(ADHD), pheochromocytoma, and withdrawal from opioids, ethanol, and nicotine. It is also 
used in spinal and epidural anesthesia. Based on its mechanism of action, it mimics clinical 
features of both opioid poisoning and poisoning from digoxin, beta-blockers, or calcium 
channel blockers.  
 
 
2.  How does clonidine toxicity present and how is it managed? 
 
Binding to pre-synaptic α2-adrenergic receptors in the brain: 
● Less norepinephrine release =  
○ Bradycardia, hypotension, decreased mental status, miosis, and occasionally 
hypothermia. 
 
Supportive care is the mainstay of management:  
● Generous IV fluid boluses for hypotension  
● Vasopressors - ideally norepinephrine for hypotension  
● Naloxone:  
○ Recommend escalating doses of naloxone of 0.1 mg, 0.4 mg, 2 mg, and 10 mg. 
Naloxone is indicated solely if the patient is obtunded or has an unprotected 
airway, and it should be administered in parallel with any necessary IV fluids 
or catecholamines. 
 
Clonidine’s peak effects occur 2 to 4 hours post-ingestion. Its half-life is between 5 and 13 
hours. Therefore patients with normal vital signs and mental status 4 hours post-ingestion 
may be discharged home or to an appropriate psychiatric facility. 
 
 
 
CrackCast Show Notes – Cardiovascular Drugs – February 2018 
www.canadiem.org/crackcast 
 
 
 
Nitrates, Nitrites  
 
Nitrates (nitroglycerin, isosorbide mononitrate, and dinitrate) are widely used as 
vasodilators in the treatment of heart failure and ischemic heart disease. 
 
Other exposures:  
● Young adults, usually male, who inhale various alkyl nitrites (amyl, butyl, isobutyl, or 
ethyl nitrite) in the hope of enhancing or prolonging sexual pleasure aka “poppers”. 
● Nitrates are occasionally found in rural well water contaminated by livestock or 
fertilizer runoff. Oral nitrates may be converted to nitrites in the gastrointestinal 
tract, especially in infants up to 4 months old.  
 
Methemoglobin is incapable of carrying oxygen, thus it alters the shape of the hemoglobin-
dissociation curve shifting it to the left, causing functional anemia via impaired oxygen 
delivery. 
 
1. What are 2 common clinical presentations of Nitrate/Nitrite toxicity? 
 
Hypotension (due to vasodilation) - with reflex tachycardia and headache 
 
Low SP02 & cyanosis occurs commonly if the percentage of methemoglobin exceeds 
10%. 
 
Higher concentrations of methemoglobin may result in fatigue, dyspnea, weakness, dizziness, 
drowsiness, coma, seizures, and death. 
 
How to confirm the diagnosis:  
1. Pt. has a low SpO2 (usually in the 75-85% range)***  
a. Trial of the High flow oxygen test - 15 lpm via NRB  
b. = no improvement of cyanosis → think MetHgb.  
2. Blood CO-oximetry  
a. MetHgb > 10% usually causes symptoms 
 
***[clinical pearl] 
Clinicians should be wary of interpreting pulse-oximetry in the setting of 
methemoglobinemia. Pulse oximeters function by reading the absorbance of light at 
wavelengths of 660 and 940 nm, which are selected to separate oxy and deoxyhemoglobin. 
Methemoglobin absorbs light at both these wavelengths more than either oxy or 
deoxyhemoglobin. This results in unreliable pulse oximetry that typically reads between 75% 
and 85%, regardless ofthe patient’s oxygenation status. 
 
Blood upon venipuncture reveals “chocolate-colored” 
 
 
2. How is nitrite poisoning managed?  
 
CrackCast Show Notes – Cardiovascular Drugs – February 2018 
www.canadiem.org/crackcast 
 
 
 
In the case of the too-high IV nitro infusion for sympathetic crashing acute pulmonary 
edema (SCAPE) = Nitrate poisoning usually responds to supine positioning, IV fluids, 
and reduction of dose or removal of the offending agent. 
 
In the case of nitrate/nitrite induced methemoglobinemia =  
1. supportive care such as supplemental oxygen and IV fluids.  
2. severely poisoned patients (symptomatic and MetHgb levels on co-oximetry >20-
25%) should be treated with IV methylene blue.  
3. An intravenous dose of 1–2 mg/ kg (max dose 24hrs 7mg/kg) of 1% methylene blue 
solution for patients with a methemoglobin concentration greater than 25% and 
any symptoms of functional anemia.  
 
The infusion should be given over 5 minutes to reduce pain at the IV site. A clinical response 
should occur within minutes of infusion. If cyanosis does not resolve in 1 hour, a second 
infusion of 1 mg/kg can be repeated. 
 
 
 
Wisecracks 
 
1. List 6 differential diagnoses for the “Slow + Low” patient (bradycardia and 
hypotension) 
 
● CCB OD 
● BB OD 
● Digoxin OD 
● Cardiac glycoside plant / animal ingestion 
● tizanidine or imidazoline receptor agonists such as tetrahydrozoline and 
oxymetazoline  
● sedative-hypnotic drug overdose,  
●  hypoglycemic drug ingestion,  
● opioid overdose,  
● CNS injury or infection, endocrine-metabolic disorder, sepsis, and acute myocardial 
infarction. 
 
2. List 6 non-cardiac symptoms of cardioactive steroid intoxication  
 
• General 
o Weakness 
o Fatigue 
o Malaise 
• GI 
o NV 
o Anorexia 
o AP 
o Diarrhea 
CrackCast Show Notes – Cardiovascular Drugs – February 2018 
www.canadiem.org/crackcast 
 
 
 
• Optho 
o Blurred vision 
o Photophobia 
o Chromatopsia 
o Transient amblyopia, diplopia, scotomas, blindness 
• Neurologic 
o Dizziness 
o HA 
o Confusion 
o Visual or auditory hallucinations 
o Paranoid ideations/psychosis 
o Somnolence 
o Abn Dreams 
o Paresthesias and neuralgias 
o Aphasia 
o Seizures 
 
Those “classic” (but actually not pathognomonic) features:  
● Gastroenteritis symptoms 
● Chromatopsia  
 
Methanol, metformin, ethambutol, ethyl chloride, quinine, and other antimalarial 
medications are all capable of producing visual disturbances. Gastrointestinal disturbances 
are common and nonspecific and may be misdiagnosed as gastritis, enteritis, or colitis. 
 
3. List three plants containing cardiac glycosides 
 
Paralyzes the Na+ ,K+ -ATPase pump, potassium cannot be transported into the cell = serum 
potassium rise.  
 
● Digoxin is derived from the Balkan foxglove plant, Digitalis lanata 
● Oleander (Nerium oleander), common to much of the Southern United States, 
contains oleandrin, a cardiac glycoside.  
○ Can be yellow, white, pink 
○ Importantly: this is a drug overdose where activated charcoal has shown 
a mortality benefit if given early!  
● Lily-of-the-Valley (Convallaria majalis), found in much of the Northern Hemisphere, 
contains convallatoxin, a cardiac glycoside. 
 
Monkshood toxicity may mimic it! Many other plants may contain similar toxins that affect 
cardiac sodium and potassium channels (but not digitoxin)   
 
CrackCast Show Notes – Cardiovascular Drugs – February 2018 
www.canadiem.org/crackcast 
 
 
 
 
Purple foxglove aka digitalis purpurea 
 
 
 
Balkan Foxglove 
 
 
Oleander 
CrackCast Show Notes – Cardiovascular Drugs – February 2018 
www.canadiem.org/crackcast 
 
 
 
 
Lily of the Valley 
 
Plants with Digoxin in them!  
1) Common oleander 2) yellow oleander 3) Lily of the valley 4) Red squill 5) Foxglove 6) 
dog's bane 7) Milkweed 
 
4. Contrast adult vs. pediatric age differences in digoxin intoxication 
 
Children with healthy hearts can tolerate massive acute oral ingestions without Fab 
treatment. This excludes therapeutic errors, children who are taking digoxin therapeutically, 
and children with heart disease. Dosage calculation and administration errors account for 
more pediatric digoxin intoxication and death than accidental oral ingestion.  
 
Adult 
Pediatric 
Toxic at lower concentrations 
Asymptomatic at higher concentrations 
Nausea, fatigue, and visual changes 
Obtundation and vomiting more common 
Tachydysrhythmias as common as blocks 
and brady’s 
Bradydysrhythmias and blocks most 
common 
Allergic reactions to Fab uncommon 
Allergic reactions extremely rare 
Vd less variable 
Vd more variable 
 
5. What are the clinical differences in presentation b/n β blocker, CCB and digoxin 
toxicity? 
 
Beta blocker 
 
Acute toxicity 
Calcium channel blocker 
 
Acute toxicity  
Digoxin toxicity  
>99% of cases are from 
chronic toxicity 
● Rapid onset < 30 
mins (unless delayed 
release form)  
● Rapid onset < 30 
mins (unless delayed 
release form)  
● More gradual onset, 
vague symptoms 
● Bradycardia 
● Bradycardia 
● Cardiac: 
CrackCast Show Notes – Cardiovascular Drugs – February 2018 
www.canadiem.org/crackcast 
 
 
 
● Hypotension  
● Unconsciousness 
● Seizures*  
● Hypoglycemia 
(especially in 
children)  
● Hypotension  
● Consciousness 
normal  
● Hyperglycemia 
● non-cardiogenic 
pulmonary edema, 
respiratory distress, 
and apnea 
 
○ tachy/brady 
dysrhythmias 
○ Less 
hypotension 
● Non-cardiac sxt 
○ GI distress 
○ Malaise 
○ Weakness 
○ Dizziness 
○ Confusion 
○ Altered LOC 
○ Visual 
changes 
Special concerns:  
● Propranolol, nadolol, 
betaxolol, sotalol and 
acebutolol =  leading 
to QRS widening, 
occasional ventricular 
dysrhythmias such as 
ventricular 
tachycardia and 
ventricular 
fibrillation, and 
cardiogenic shock 
 
Special concerns:  
● 
Amlodipine: can cause a 
reflex tachycardia and 
hypotension  
● 
Calcium influx into the 
pancreas is blocked = 
leading to hyperglycemia  
● 
Pediatrics: Nifedipine, 
verapamil, and probably 
other drugs in its class join 
the short list of 
medications that can kill a 
child with ingestion of a 
single tablet. Seizures may 
be more common in children 
than in adults and should be 
treated with diazepam, 
lorazepam, or phenobarbital. 
 
Special notes:  
● Has a rapidly acting 
antidote!  
● Can present with any 
dysrhythmia other 
than A fib. With 
RVR 
● Acute toxicity is rare 
● Inquire re: cardiac 
glycoside containing 
plants  
● Myocardium is 
irritable 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
