# Metadata
- topic: 5.4 - Special Clinical Circumstances - CCE185-Alcohol-Related-Disease
- source_folder: 5.4 - Special Clinical Circumstances
- original_file: CCE185-Alcohol-Related-Disease.pdf

CrackCast Show Notes – Alcohol Related Disease – June 2018 
www.canadiem.org/crackcast 
 
 
Episode 185 (Ch. 142 9th) – Alcohol Related Disease 
 
Episode Overview: 
 
1) Describe the EtOH pathway of metabolism.  What order kinetics are 
involved? 
2) Describe the AUDIT-C screening tool.  
3) Define hazardous drinking amounts  
4) Define substance dependence. What are signs of substance 
dependence?  
5) Differential Diagnosis for acute withdrawal 
6) Define and characterize minor + major ETOH withdrawal, and define 
delirium tremens (DTs) 
7) List RF for DTs 
8) Describe the management of severe EtOH withdrawal 
9) List the ways EtOH precipitates or is related to Seizures; and a 
differential diagnosis of ETOH-related seizures 
10) 
Describe the management of EtOH withdrawal seizures 
11) 
Describe the pathogenesis and treatment of AKA 
12) 
Describe the Wernicke's Encephalopathy triad, treatment, and 
prevention strategies. 
13) 
List 10 complications of chronic EtOH use 
14) 
List 6 contributing factor to UGI bleeding from EtOH 
15) 
List 8 electrolyte/metabolic effects from chronic drinking 
16) 
List 4 ways EtOH interacts with other drugs 
 
Key Concepts: 
 
• Moderate alcohol consumption is defined as one or two drinks/day for men 
and one drink/day for women. 
 
• Benzodiazepines are the main treatment of alcohol withdrawal and alcohol 
withdrawal seizures. Minor alcohol withdrawal occurs as early as 6 hours and 
usually peaks at 24 to 36 hours after the cessation of or significant decrease 
in alcohol intake. 
 
• Major alcohol withdrawal occurs after 24 hours and usually peaks at 50 
hours (but occasionally takes up to 5 days) after the decrease or 
termination of drinking. 
 
• Delirium tremens is the extreme end of the alcohol withdrawal spectrum; it 
consists of gross tremors, profound confusion, fever, incontinence, and 
frightening visual hallucinations. 
 
• Alcohol withdrawal seizures occur 6 to 48 hours after the cessation of 
drinking, with 60% of patients experiencing multiple seizures within a 6-hour 
period. 
CrackCast Show Notes – Alcohol Related Disease – June 2018 
www.canadiem.org/crackcast 
 
 
 
• Alcohol withdrawal should be assessed and managed using a validated scale, 
such as the CIWA-Ar scale. 
 
Rosen’s in Perspective: 
 
Anyone who works in the ER knows well the epidemic extent of alcoholism. Alcohol 
is the most common recreational drug taken by Americans, and per capita 
consumption is increasing. Alcohol is the third leading cause of preventable death in 
the United States; alcoholism permeates all levels of society and is a preventable 
cause of morbidity and mortality. 
 
Today we’ll touch on the key points for four emergent alcohol withdrawal syndromes; 
here’s a signpost:  
 
 
 
[1] Describe the alcohol pathway of metabolism. What order 
kinetics are involved? 
 
● Absorption 
○ rapid 
● Distribution 
○ It is distributed uniformly to all organ systems, including the placenta.  
● Metabolism 
○ The hepatocyte: most is metabolized to acetaldehyde, primarily by 
alcohol dehydrogenase (ADH). The oxidation of alcohol is a complex 
process involving three enzyme systems, all contained in the 
hepatocyte. Acetaldehyde is then quickly converted to carbon dioxide 
and water, primarily through aldehyde dehydrogenase (ALDH). 
○ There are genetic variations of ADH genes that affect tolerance to 
alcohol intake:  
■ However, about 40% of Asian people (Japanese, Chinese, and 
Koreans) have an inactive ALDH2 mutation that results in much 
higher acetaldehyde levels after drinking than normal. About 
10% of people who are homozygous for this gene form cannot 
drink alcohol without becoming sick and have almost no risk of 
AUD, whereas those who are heterozygous have a relatively low 
rate of AUD.  An alternative pathway, the microsomal ethanol-
oxidizing system (MEOS), is induced by chronic alcohol 
exposure. 
CrackCast Show Notes – Alcohol Related Disease – June 2018 
www.canadiem.org/crackcast 
 
 
 
 
Alcohol metabolism has two elimination rates. The alcohol elimination rate 
approximates zero-order kinetics (constant rate) for lower ethanol levels and first-
order kinetics (amount of drug removed over time is proportional to the concentration 
of the drug) for higher levels, especially in chronic alcoholics; most likely, through 
induction of the MEOS pathway, the elimination rate is increased at higher blood 
levels. 
 
The absorption and elimination rates of alcohol vary by individual and depend on 
many factors—diet, gender, body weight and habitus, speed of consumption, gastric 
motility, presence of food in the stomach, smoking history, age, whether the person 
is a chronic alcohol consumer with enzyme induction and high-activity MEOS, 
advanced cirrhosis, presence of ascites, and state of nourishment. 
 
The rate of ETOH elimination varies, but in general (assuming zero order kinetics) is 
from 2-8 mmol/L/hr .  
 
The exact physiologic effects of different levels are UNPREDICTABLE, some people 
are intolerant of levels as low as 5 mmol/L; a level of 32 mmol/L is where 50% of the 
adult population will be obviously intoxicated. Chronic alcoholics are tolerant of much 
higher levels.  
 
● Excretion  
○ Excreted through the lungs, urine, and sweat 
 
[2] Define substance dependence. What are the signs of 
dependence? 
 
This is a misleading question, because some of the current terminology has shifted 
based on the DSM-V. Replacing the two DSM-IV diagnoses of substance abuse and 
dependence is a single diagnosis, SUD, named by the type of substance involved 
(eg, alcohol use disorder or cannabis use disorder) and a specifier indicating severity 
(mild, mod, severe). 
 
— DSM-5 diagnostic criteria for SUD are described below . 
A problematic pattern of use leading to clinically significant impairment or distress is 
manifested by two or more of the following within a 12-month period: 
 
CrackCast Show Notes – Alcohol Related Disease – June 2018 
www.canadiem.org/crackcast 
 
 
1. Often taken in larger amounts or over a longer period than was intended. 
2. A persistent desire or unsuccessful efforts to cut down or control use. 
3. A great deal of time is spent in activities necessary to obtain, use, or recover 
from the substance’s effects. 
4. Craving or a strong desire or urge to use the substance. 
5. Recurrent use resulting in a failure to fulfill major role obligations at work, 
school, or home. 
6. Continued use despite having persistent or recurrent social or interpersonal 
problems caused or exacerbated by its effects. 
7. Important social, occupational, or recreational activities are given up or 
reduced because of use. 
8. Recurrent use in situations in which it is physically hazardous. 
9. Continued use despite knowledge of having a persistent or recurrent physical 
or psychological problem that is likely to have been caused or exacerbated by 
the substance. 
10. Tolerance. 
11. Withdrawal. 
Preoccupation with use is often demonstrated by giving up previously important 
activities, increasing the time spent in activities related to substance use, and using 
more frequently or for longer amounts of time than planned. Consumption may 
continue despite the continued existence or worsening of problems caused by 
substance use. In applying criteria on consequences and behaviors associated with 
use, it is important to include alcohol-related blackouts, and impulsive sexual 
behavior. 
Severity — Alcohol and drug symptom profiles appear to vary along a severity 
dimension. DSM-5 severity specifiers mild, moderate, and severe are based on 
the number of diagnostic criteria met by the patient at the time of diagnosis: 
●Mild – Two to three criteria 
●Moderate – Four to five criteria 
CrackCast Show Notes – Alcohol Related Disease – June 2018 
www.canadiem.org/crackcast 
 
 
●Severe – Six or more criteria 
Healthcare coding and billing in the United States is based on the International 
Classification of Diseases (ICD). DSM-5 and ICD criteria for a substance use 
disorder are very similar, but ICD require a minimum of three criteria instead of two. 
The ICD diagnoses of “harmful use” require only substance related physical or 
psychological harm. 
Most published clinical trials of SUD treatment studied patients diagnosed with 
DSM-IV disorders. Applying these results to patients diagnosed with DSM-5 
SUD is imprecise, but the most closely comparable groups are: 
●Substance abuse – Mild subtype of SUD 
●Substance dependence – Moderate to severe subtype of SUD 
 
Alcohol use disorder in DSM-5 replaces two psychiatric disorders in DSM-IV, alcohol 
abuse and alcohol dependence. Alcohol use disorder can be specified as mild, 
moderate, or severe (6 or more symptoms present), based on the number of DSM-5 
criteria present.  
 
DSM-5 diagnostic criteria for alcohol use disorder are: 
●Recurrent drinking resulting in failure to fulfill role obligations 
●Recurrent drinking in hazardous situations 
●Continued drinking despite alcohol-related social or interpersonal problems 
●Evidence of tolerance 
●Evidence of alcohol withdrawal or use of alcohol for relief or avoidance of 
withdrawal 
●Drinking in larger amounts or over longer periods than intended 
●Persistent desire or unsuccessful attempts to stop or reduce drinking 
●Great deal of time spent obtaining, using, or recovering from alcohol 
●Important activities given up or reduced because of drinking 
●Continued drinking despite knowledge of physical or psychological problems 
caused by alcohol 
CrackCast Show Notes – Alcohol Related Disease – June 2018 
www.canadiem.org/crackcast 
 
 
●Alcohol craving 
-The above compiled from Uptodate 2018 
 
[3] Describe the AUDIT-C screening test. 
 
Some sources confirm that 25-30% patients visiting the ER meet the criteria for at 
risk drinking. The CAGE questionnaire is designed to assess for LIFETIME ETOH 
dependence and is no longer recommended as a screening tool because it is geared 
towards the DSM-IV diagnoses of substance abuse and dependence; plus it is not 
as sensitive for detecting the full spectrum of unhealthy use.  
 
However, the Alcohol Use Disorders Identification Test (AUDIT)-C is best used for 
primary care settings.  
 
AUD consist of alcohol dependence, alcohol abuse, or harmful use. These disorders 
are common in all developed countries and are more prevalent in men than in 
women, with lower but still substantial rates in developing countries.  
 
However, most people with AUD are difficult to identify because they are likely to 
have jobs and families and to present with general complaints, such as malaise, 
insomnia, anxiety, sadness, or a range of medical problems.  
 
In response to the high prevalence of this disease, the American Medical Association 
has recommended screening patients for alcohol use problems in medical and 
surgical settings and EDs. 
 
AUDIT-C — The AUDIT-C is a screening test comprised of three items on excess 
consumption from the Alcohol Use Disorders Identification Test (AUDIT). The 
questions, below, have been validated primarily in male veterans but studies 
demonstrating validity in primary care and other populations are beginning to appear. 
The AUDIT-C is briefer than the original test, but still requires scoring.  
●How often do you have a drink containing alcohol? 
●How many drinks containing alcohol do you have on a typical day when you 
are drinking? 
●How often do you have six or more drinks on one occasion? 
Scores considered positive for unhealthy drinking are: 
●Three or more in women, with 73 percent sensitivity and 91 percent specificity 
●Four or more in men, with 86 percent sensitivity and 89 percent specificity 
CrackCast Show Notes – Alcohol Related Disease – June 2018 
www.canadiem.org/crackcast 
 
 
Although the AUDIT-C contains no items specific to disorders, the score is 
associated with severity; a score of 7 to 10 or greater suggests dependence 
 
 
The goal of this test is identify people who are drinking hazardous amounts! 
 
[4] Define hazardous drinking amounts 
 
Alcohol contributes to 79,000 deaths and $223.5 billion in societal costs annually in 
the United States. Harmful consequences and risk of disability exist on a continuum.  
 
At-risk drinking is defined as heavy or problematic alcohol use that may lead to an 
array of negative consequences, including social, physical, psychological, legal, and 
financial problems. 
The National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism (NIAAA) in the United States 
has estimated consumption amounts of alcohol that increase health risks: 
●Men under age 65 
•More than 14 standard drinks per week on average 
•More than 4 drinks on any day 
●Women and adults 65 years and older 
•More than 7 standard drinks per week on average 
•More than 3 drinks on any day 
CrackCast Show Notes – Alcohol Related Disease – June 2018 
www.canadiem.org/crackcast 
 
 
Specifying these thresholds is an inexact science based on epidemiological 
evidence. Amounts are based on a “standard drink,” which is defined as 12 grams of 
ethanol, 5 ounces of wine, 12 ounces of beer, or 1.5 ounces of 80 proof spirits. The 
number and size of drinks that define risky amounts varies internationally. 
- 
Uptodate  
 
[5] List the differential diagnosis for acute alcohol withdrawal 
 
● Prescription 
○ Benzodiazepines  
● “Recreational” 
○ ETOH 
 
Acute intoxication of any substance during the withdrawal period: 
● Cocaine 
● GHB 
● Amphetamines 
● Any other illicit substance! 
 
[6] Define and characterize minor and major alcohol withdrawal, 
and define delirium tremens (DTs) 
 
Symptoms of alcohol withdrawal occur because alcohol is a central nervous system 
depressant. Alcohol simultaneously enhances inhibitory tone (via modulation of 
gamma-aminobutyric acid activity) and inhibits excitatory tone (via modulation of 
excitatory amino acid activity). Only the constant presence of ethanol preserves 
homeostasis. Abrupt cessation unmasks the adaptive responses to chronic ethanol 
use resulting in overactivity of the central nervous system. 
Gamma-aminobutyric acid — Gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) is the major 
inhibitory neurotransmitter in the brain. Highly specific binding sites for ethanol are 
found on the GABA receptor complex. Chronic ethanol use induces an insensitivity 
to GABA such that more inhibitor is required to maintain a constant inhibitory tone. 
As alcohol tolerance develops, the individual retains arousal at alcohol 
concentrations which would normally produce lethargy or even coma in relatively 
alcohol naïve individuals. Cessation of alcohol or a reduction from chronically 
elevated concentrations results in decreased inhibitory tone. 
Excitatory amino acids — Glutamate is one of the major excitatory amino acids. 
When glutamate binds to the N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptor, calcium influx 
CrackCast Show Notes – Alcohol Related Disease – June 2018 
www.canadiem.org/crackcast 
 
 
leads to neuronal excitation by binding to the glycine receptor on the NMDA 
complex. Ethanol inhibits glutamate induced excitation. Adaptation occurs by 
increasing the number of glutamate receptors in an attempt to maintain a normal 
state of arousal. Cessation of alcohol or a reduction from chronically elevated 
concentrations results in unregulated excess excitation. - Uptodate  
 
Minor ETOH withdrawal 
Major ETOH withdrawal 
Delirium tremens (< 5%) 
trembling, 
sweating, nausea, 
vomiting, anxiety, and 
agitation. 
 
additional neuronal 
excitation, with epileptiform 
seizures and global 
confusion 
May have vital sign 
changes  
hallucinations, 
disorientation, tachycardia, 
hypertension, 
hyperthermia, agitation, 
and diaphoresis  
in the setting of acute 
reduction or abstinence 
from alcohol.  
in the setting of acute 
reduction or abstinence 
from alcohol.  
in the setting of acute 
reduction or abstinence 
from alcohol.  
Peaks within 24 hours 
Peaks within 24-48 hrs 
typically begins between 
48 and 96 hours after the 
last drink and lasts one to 
five days 
 
 
 
 
 
 
[7] List risk factors for delirium tremens 
• A history of sustained drinking 
• A history of previous DT 
• Age greater than 30 
• The presence of a concurrent illness 
• The presence of significant alcohol withdrawal in the presence of an elevated alcohol 
level 
CrackCast Show Notes – Alcohol Related Disease – June 2018 
www.canadiem.org/crackcast 
 
 
• A longer period since the last drink (ie. patients who present with alcohol withdrawal 
more than two days after their last drink are more likely to experience DT than those who 
present within two days) 
[8] Describe the management of severe alcohol withdrawal 
 
Alcohol withdrawal remains a clinical diagnosis. It may be necessary to perform extensive 
testing, including lumbar puncture and cranial CT, to rule out other diagnostic 
considerations with confidence. This is particularly true when the presentation includes 
altered mental status and fever.  
 
Conditions, such as infection (eg, meningitis), trauma (eg, intracranial hemorrhage), 
metabolic derangements, drug overdose, hepatic failure, and gastrointestinal bleeding, can 
mimic or coexist with alcohol withdrawal  
 
Treatment 
Benzodiazepines 
First line therapy for ALL alcohol withdrawal syndromes 
Most patients with symptoms require IV therapy initially 
Give: 
Diazepam, 5 to 10 mg IV, repeat every 5 to 10 minutes, OR 
Lorazepam, 2 to 4 mg IV, repeat every 15 to 20 minutes 
Massive doses (>2000 mg diazepam in 48 hours) may be required 
Clinically stable patients with minimal symptoms may be treated with oral medications 
Barbiturates 
Synergistic with benzodiazepines; give if patient refractory to high-dose benzodiazepines 
Phenobarbital 130 to 260 mg IV, repeat every 15 to 20 minutes 
Intubation frequently required with concurrent benzodiazepine and barbiturate use 
ALL patients requiring barbiturates are monitored in an intensive care unit 
Propofol 
Excellent agent if patient refractory to benzodiazepines and barbiturates 
Intubation almost always required 
1 mg/kg IV push as induction agent for intubation; titrate continuous infusion for sedation 
CrackCast Show Notes – Alcohol Related Disease – June 2018 
www.canadiem.org/crackcast 
 
 
Supportive care 
Assure adequate fluid and electrolyte replacement 
Give parenteral thiamine 100 mg and glucose daily 
Give multivitamin supplements 
Ensure adequate caloric support 
 
Patients should be placed in a quiet, protective environment. Mechanical restraint may 
be necessary temporarily for patients suffering from delirium tremens (DT) in order to 
protect both the patient and caretakers. 
 
[9] List the ways that alcohol precipitates or is related to seizures. 
List a differential for alcohol withdrawal seizures. 
 
See Box 142.2 in the 9th edition. 
 
We already know that the abrupt withdrawal of ETOH leads to an imbalance of 
glutamate in the CNS. But there are at least 6 ways that ETOH may act to produce 
seizures:  
 
1. by its partial or absolute withdrawal after a period of chronic intake,  
2. by an acute alcohol-related metabolic disorder (eg, hypoglycemia, 
hyponatremia),  
3. creation of a situation leading to cerebral trauma,  
4. precipitation of seizures in patients with idiopathic or post-traumatic 
epilepsy,  
5. or lowering of the seizure threshold in patients with prior existing 
intracerebral disease states.  
6. Increasing susceptibility to other disorders associated with seizures, 
including neurosyphilis, acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS), 
brain abscess, and meningitis. 
 
[10] Describe the management of alcohol withdrawal seizures. 
 
In general: only supportive care!  
 
Withdrawal-associated seizures are generalized tonic-clonic convulsions that usually 
occur within 12 to 48 hours after the last alcoholic drink, but may occur after only two 
hours of abstinence. The seizures occur predominantly in patients with a long history 
of chronic alcoholism, as evidenced by their typical onset during the fourth and fifth 
decades of life. 
 
CrackCast Show Notes – Alcohol Related Disease – June 2018 
www.canadiem.org/crackcast 
 
 
****Withdrawal seizures are usually singular or occur as a brief flurry of seizures over 
a short period. Recurrent or prolonged seizures or status epilepticus are not 
consistent with withdrawal-associated seizures and should prompt an investigation 
into possible structural or infectious etiologies, generally guided by the findings of 
cranial computed tomography (CT) and/or lumbar puncture. ****** 
 
Benzodiazepines, phenobarbital, and propofol can be used to treat status epilepticus 
while investigations proceed. Several studies have demonstrated that phenytoin is 
ineffective in the treatment of alcohol withdrawal seizures and the drug should not be 
used for this purpose. Although seemingly benign, alcohol withdrawal seizures left 
untreated progress to delirium tremens in nearly one-third of patients 
 
[11] Describe the pathogenesis and treatment of alcoholic 
ketoacidosis. 
 
Ketoacidosis is the term used for metabolic acidosis associated with an 
accumulation of ketone bodies. The most common cause of ketoacidosis is diabetic 
ketoacidosis. Two other causes are fasting ketosis and alcoholic ketoacidosis. 
 
There are three ketone bodies 
● Beta-hydroxybutyric acid 
● Acetoacetic acid 
○ The only TRUE KETOACID 
● Acetone  
○ True ketone, but NOT an acid 
 
 
Pathogenesis:  
● Think about this in the malnourished patients with chronic alcoholism who 
have a history of binge alcohol ingestion. Active drinking has often stopped 
because of the development of abdominal pain, nausea, and vomiting. Blood 
ethanol levels at this time may be low or not detectable. 
● Hepatic generation of ketone bodies is usually stimulated by the combination 
of low insulin levels and high glucagon levels (ie, a low insulin/glucagon ratio 
that can result, for example, from fasting). 
CrackCast Show Notes – Alcohol Related Disease – June 2018 
www.canadiem.org/crackcast 
 
 
● ETOH withdrawal amplifies the response to fasting and increases fatty acid 
breakdown 
○ As ethanol levels begin to fall, increased levels of catecholamines 
(particularly norepinephrine) and cortisol resulting from ethanol 
withdrawal amplify the hormonal responses to fasting (low insulin 
levels, high glucagon), causing a marked increase in lipolysis and fatty 
acid delivery to the liver.  
○ Patients with alcoholic ketoacidosis typically present with a history of 
chronic alcohol abuse, malnutrition, and a recent episode of binge 
drinking.  
 
Presentation:  
● Nausea, vomiting, and abdominal pain 
● Generalized abdominal tenderness, hepatomegaly, and laboratory evidence 
of alcoholic hepatitis and/or pancreatitis 
● Hypovolemia and/or potassium depletion 
● Tachycardia and hypertension due to alcohol withdrawal, pancreatitis, and/or 
volume depletion, as outlined above 
● Increased respiratory rate, due to alcohol withdrawal, pain, and/or respiratory 
compensation for the metabolic acidosis 
● Plasma alcohol levels may be low or undetectable at presentation in patients 
with alcoholic ketoacidosis. In addition, such patients may have hypoglycemia 
or hyperglycemia, hypokalemia, hypophosphatemia, hypomagnesemia, an 
elevated serum osmolal gap, and mixed acid-base disorders.  
 
Diagnosis of AKA:  
● Suspicion or clinical history and a low glucose level (90% with a glucose <13 
mmol/L) 
● Elevated anion gap 
● Ketonuria (*) or ketonemia (serum beta-hydroxybutyrate much superior) 
 
Keep that ddx broad! Don’t forget other life threats: diabetic ketoacidosis, lactic 
acidosis, poisoning due to methanol or ethylene glycol (which is more common in 
alcoholics), and, in patients with advanced, usually chronic kidney disease, uremic 
acidosis  
 
Management:  
● Correct the underlying cause behind the acidemic state 
● Supportive!  
○ Correct hypovolemia with dextrose and saline solutions 
■ Dextrose will help reduce ketone production, and help the body 
produce more bicarbonate to reverse the metabolic acidosis  
○ Simultaneously administer at least 100 mg Thiamine IV or IM 
○ Correct hypokalemia (especially important in people who are severely 
hypoK before giving dextrose!)  
■ IV or PO 
○ Correct phosphate depletion  
■ Typically potassium phosphate given PO (unless extremely low)  
● K-Phos 500 mg PO four times a day with meals  
○ IV magnesium salts  
CrackCast Show Notes – Alcohol Related Disease – June 2018 
www.canadiem.org/crackcast 
 
 
 
 
 
 * Nitroprusside reacts with acetoacetate and, to a much lesser degree, acetone 
(which is not an acid). However, nitroprusside does not react with beta-
hydroxybutyrate. This is an important limitation since beta-hydroxybutyrate is usually 
present at higher concentrations than acetoacetate. The ratio of beta-
hydroxybutyrate to acetoacetate is normally 1:1, increases to 3:1 in diabetic 
ketoacidosis, and may increase to 10:1 in alcoholic ketoacidosis. The higher beta-
hydroxybutyrate-to-acetoacetate ratio in alcoholic patients is due to a higher 
NAD+/NADH ratio generated by alcohol metabolism. Thus, in most patients with 
alcoholic ketoacidosis, nitroprusside tests underestimate the degree of ketone 
bodies in plasma, and some patients may have negative tests 
 
 
- 
Compiled from Uptodate “Fasting ketosis and alcoholic ketoacidosis” 
 
[12] Describe the Wernicke’s Encephalopathy triad, treatment 
and prevent strategies. 
 
Wernicke encephalopathy is an acute neurologic disorder caused by thiamine 
deficiency and manifested by a clinical triad of encephalopathy, oculomotor 
dysfunction, and gait ataxia.  
 
Wernicke’s DATE. diplopia, ataxia, thiamine, encephalopathy  
 
Wernicke encephalopathy produces petechial hemorrhagic necrosis in midline brain 
structures and corresponding deficits in mentation, oculomotor function, and gait 
ataxia.  
 
All three of these classic symptoms are present in only one-third of patients. Any one 
of these, most often encephalopathy, may be seen in isolation. WE should be 
considered when one or more occur in at-risk patients. 
 
There is no diagnostic test that confirms the diagnosis, so whenever you suspect it, 
give thiamine!  
 
A suggested treatment regimen is 500 mg intravenous (IV), infused over 30 minutes, 
repeated three times daily for two consecutive days and 250 mg IV or IM once daily 
for an additional five days. Oral thiamine and multivitamin supplementation are 
recommended thereafter as long as the patient remains at risk.  
●Wernicke encephalopathy may be precipitated by administration of intravenous 
glucose solutions to individuals with thiamine deficiency. In susceptible 
CrackCast Show Notes – Alcohol Related Disease – June 2018 
www.canadiem.org/crackcast 
 
 
individuals glucose administration should be preceded or accompanied by 
thiamine 100 mg IV.  
-uptodate  
 
 
Korsakoff amnestic syndrome is the CHRONIC form of thiamine deficiency.  
 
[13] List 10 complications of chronic alcohol use 
 
ETOH negatively impacts every organ system.  
 
Here are just a few effects:  
● CV 
○ Dysrhythmia formation - A fib, VTach.  
○ Worsen CAD 
○ HTN 
○ Cardiomyopathy  
○ Increased risk of sudden death  
● Resp 
○ Increased risk of aspiration and pneumonia  
○ Increased risk of bronchospasm and sleep apnea  
● Neuro 
○ Peripheral polyneuropathy (probably in conjunction with thiamine and 
B12 deficiency   
○ Wernicke’s encephalopathy 
○ Korsakoff’s psychosis or amnesic state, also called alcohol induced 
persisting amnestic disorder 
○ Cerebellar degeneration  
● GI 
○ GI bleeding 
○ Hepatic damage  
● Infectious disease 
○ Chronic immunosuppression  
● Oncologic effects 
● Psychiatric disease and social isolation  
● Metabolic - endocrine (see question below)  
 
[14] List 6 contributing factors to upper GI bleeding from alcohol 
 
● Development of portal hypertension and varices from cirrhosis 
● ETOH induced gastritis / esophagitis 
● ETOH related GI cancers 
● ETOH related hemostasis disorders  
○ thrombocytopenia, qualitative platelet disorders, deficient production of 
hepatic clotting factors, GI variceal formation, and vitamin K deficiency 
CrackCast Show Notes – Alcohol Related Disease – June 2018 
www.canadiem.org/crackcast 
 
 
● Comorbid substance use disorders: 
○ Smoking, cocaine, NSAIDs 
● Increased risk for dieulafoy’s lesions  
● GI trauma from withdrawal or intake leading to mallory-weiss syndrome (or 
another cause of vomiting such as pancreatitis)  
 
[15] List 8 metabolic/electrolyte effects from chronic alcohol use 
 
Poor oral intake; intestinal pathology: Diarrhea and impaired intestinal absorption are 
common problems of the chronic alcoholic. Alcohol increases small intestine transit 
time and decreases brush border enzyme activity.  
 
Thiamine, vitamin B12, amino acids, folic acid, and glucose have impaired 
absorption in alcoholics. Dietary deficiencies in folic acid and protein, pancreatic 
insufficiency, abnormal biliary secretion, and direct toxic effects of ethanol on the GI 
tract contribute to malabsorption. Abstinence and adequate nutrition reverse the 
diarrhea and much of the malabsorption. 
 
● Hypoglycemia (glycogen deplete liver! Glucagon won’t help!)  
○ Inhibited gluconeogenesis  
● Hypokalemia 
● Hypomagnesemia 
● Hypophosphatemia  
● Hyponatremia  
● Hypocalcemia  
● Low testosterone (and increased estrogen = decreased libido, feminization, 
and gynecomastia) 
● Low cortisol 
● Low growth hormone 
● Insulin resistance 
● Hypertriglyceridemia  
● Hypoparathyroidism  
● Hypoalbuminemia 
● Hypovitaminosis D 
● depressed hypothalamic thermoregulation, peripheral vasodilation producing 
heat loss 
● Heme effects 
○ Anemia 
○ Low platelets 
○ Poor hemostasis 
○ Leukopenia  
 
See Table 142.3 in 9th Edition 
 
[16] List 4 ways alcohol interacts with other drugs 
 
CrackCast Show Notes – Alcohol Related Disease – June 2018 
www.canadiem.org/crackcast 
 
 
● Increased toxic effects of acetaminophen 
● Further lower the seizure threshold with bupropion  
● Enhances the depressant effect of cannabis, benzodiazepines and most other 
sedatives  
● Prolongs the severity and duration of intoxication with cocaine  
● Increases risk for lactic acidosis with metformin 
● Disulfiram-like reaction when metronidazole and ETOH are consumed 
● Enhances the hypotensive effects of medications like PDE5 inhibitors and 
nitrates  
 
And many others….!  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
