# Metadata
- topic: 4.2 - Toxicology - CCE162-Plants-Mushrooms-Herbals-1
- source_folder: 4.2 - Toxicology
- original_file: CCE162-Plants-Mushrooms-Herbals-1.pdf

CrackCast Show Notes – Plants, Mushrooms, and Herbal Medications – March 2018 
www.canadiem.org/crackcast 
 
 
Episode 164 (Ch. 158 9th) – Plants, Mushrooms and Herbals 
 
Episode Overview: 
 
1. For each of the following, describe the expected toxicity 
a. Jequirity pea, Rosary  
b. Umbrella tree, Dieffenbachia, Dumb cane 
c. Capsicum annum  
d. Water Hemlock 
e. Jimson Weed, Deadly Nightshade 
f. Eucalyptus oil 
g. Poinsettia 
h. Oleander, Foxglove 
i. Tobacco 
j. Pokeweed 
k. Rhododendron 
l. Yew 
m. Castor Beans  
2. List 5 mushrooms with early onset toxicity and 3 with late onset – and 
describe the toxicity expected. 
3. List 4 mechanism of toxicity resulting from the use of herbal medicine  
4. List 4 plants containing cardiac glycosides 
5. What is Buckthorn? 
 
 
KEY CONCEPTS 
 
❏ Most botanical exposures result in minimal toxicity and management is largely 
symptom-based, supportive care. 
 
❏ Most serious toxicity results from exposure to plants with anticholinergic, antimitotic, 
cardiovascular, or convulsive properties 
 
❏ Most cases in which gastrointestinal (GI) symptoms begin within the first 2 hours 
after an unknown mushroom ingestion will prove to involve a non–life-threatening 
substance 
 
❏ GI symptoms that onset in more than 6 to 8 hours suggest a potentially life-
threatening ingestion, such as the cyclopeptide and gyromitrin groups 
 
❏ Use local poison control centers, mycologists, and botanists to help identify serious 
plants and mushrooms that have been ingested. We recommend digital photography 
with expert consultation 
 
❏ Herbal medications are unregulated and may have inherent toxicity, herb-drug 
interactions, or contaminants. Clinicians should advise against the routine use of 
herbal medications. 
 
 
CrackCast Show Notes – Plants, Mushrooms, and Herbal Medications – March 2018 
www.canadiem.org/crackcast 
 
 
Rosen’s in Perspective 
 
❏ Since ancient times plants have been used for nutritional, therapeutic, psychoactive, 
and toxic properties 
 
❏ Ancient Greeks recognized the lethal effects plants for eg sentencing Socrates to death 
by ingestion of a hemlock-based liquid 
 
❏ 65% plant exposures involve children younger than 6 years old 
 
❏ Majority of plant exposures result in minimal toxicity and death is exceedingly rare 
 
❏ The most common severe and occasionally fatal poisonings= anticholinergic, 
antimitotic, cardiotoxic, or convulsive properties 
 
[1] For each of the following, describe the expected toxicity. 
 
Jequirity pea / Rosary, Castor Beans  
 
❏ Toxalbumins 
❏ Contain the toxins abrin and ricin 
❏ Inhibit ribosomal protein synthesis, leading to cell death. 
❏ Seeds or beans swallowed whole with the hard outer shell intact typically prevent absorption of 
significant toxin 
❏ Chewed or crushed=may release the toxin and cause local toxicity in the GI tract 
❏ Symptoms may progress to severe neurologic toxicity (seizure, coma, cerebral edema, demyelinating 
encephalitis), multi-organ failure, and death 
❏ Purified ricin derived from the castor bean is highly toxic and lethal in small doses 
 
 
jequirity pea 
 
 
Castor Beans  
CrackCast Show Notes – Plants, Mushrooms, and Herbal Medications – March 2018 
www.canadiem.org/crackcast 
 
 
 
 
 
Umbrella tree (Schefflera arboricola), Dumb cane (Dieffenbachia) 
 
❏ These plants are commonly found in homes / offices - hard to kill ‘em and look good 
❏ Toxicity with these plants comes down to the presence of Raphides 
❏ Raphides= needle-shaped, calcium oxalate crystals \ 
❏ Ingestions can result in vomiting, mucosal irritation, ulceration, and edema  
❏ Look for airway compromise in severe ingestions 
❏ Dermal exposures may lead to contact dermatitis 
❏ Treatment = supportive, including maintenance of a patent airway.  
❏ Corticosteroids and antihistamines = adjunctive therapies 
❏ diphenhydramine (25 to 50 mg intravenous push [IVP]) and dexamethasone (4 to 8 mg IVP) 
 
 
Umbrella Tree (Schefflera arboricola) 
 
 
Dumb cane (Dieffenbachia) 
 
Capsicum annum aka all those peppers you love (jalapeno, bell, cayenne) 
 
❏ Basically comes down to capsaicin  
❏ Vanilloid 1 receptor (TRPV1) agonist 
❏ These receptors activate nociceptive nerve fibers 
❏ Potent burning sensation 
❏ Causes GI / Mucosal / Dermal irritation 
 
CrackCast Show Notes – Plants, Mushrooms, and Herbal Medications – March 2018 
www.canadiem.org/crackcast 
 
 
 
 
 
Water Hemlock 
❏ Cicutoxin 
❏ Neurotoxicity / seizures (GABA antagonist) 
❏ Supportive / Benzos 
 
 
 
 
Jimson Weed, Deadly Nightshade 
❏ Anticholinergic Toxicity 
❏ Commonly mistaken for blueberries 
❏ Supportive care, consider physostigmine 
 
 
CrackCast Show Notes – Plants, Mushrooms, and Herbal Medications – March 2018 
www.canadiem.org/crackcast 
 
 
Eucalyptus oil 
 
❏ High doses eucalyptol = ingestion, skin contact, or inhalation  
❏ Usually cause GI or dermal irritation 
❏ However, large doses of essential oil preparations have been reported for causes of status epilepticus 
 
 
Eucalyptus Tree 
 
Poinsettia 
 
❏ Mild GI toxicity when plants ingested (N/V/D) 
❏ Can cause temporary blindness when exposed to eyes 
 
 
 
 
Oleander, Foxglove, Lily of the valley, Milkweed 
 
❏ Cardiac glycoside 
❏ Digitalis tox / digoxin toxicity 
❏ Bind to cell transmembrane Na+-K+-ATPases 
❏ Leads to a rise in intracellular Ca2+ concentrations 
❏ Depresses the AV/SA nodes, increased contractility and myocardial irritability 
❏ Low & slow toxidrome 
 
 
CrackCast Show Notes – Plants, Mushrooms, and Herbal Medications – March 2018 
www.canadiem.org/crackcast 
 
 
 
Oleander 
 
 
Foxglove 
 
 
Lily of the Valley 
 
 
Milkweed 
CrackCast Show Notes – Plants, Mushrooms, and Herbal Medications – March 2018 
www.canadiem.org/crackcast 
 
 
 
Tobacco 
 
❏ Nicotinic   
❏ SLUDGE / BBB + Neuromuscular Weakness → Looks more sympathomimetic initially than does a 
regular cholinergic toxidrome 
❏ Supportive care, atropine, benzos 
 
 
 
Pokeweed 
 
❏ Can be lethal in Children and to adults in large amounts 
❏ Highest concentrations= rootstock > leaves > stems > ripe fruit 
❏ Berries can be very toxic, even when immature 
 
 
Pokeweed (Phytolacca americana) 
 
Rhododendron 
 
❏ Rhododendron species contain grayanotoxin 
❏ AKA “Mad Honey”  
❏ Present in honey that is produced from their nectar 
❏ Presents w/ GI symptoms, hypersalivation, diaphoresis, and cardiac effects. 
❏ Grayanotoxin = sodium channel “openers” - hold Na channels in their open state and keep cells in a 
depolarized state 
❏ Watch for Low & Slow 
❏ Bradydysrhythmias (including sinus bradycardia, AV blocks, and atrial fibrillation with slow 
ventricular response) 
❏ Hypotension 
❏ Seizures 
❏ Tx w/ fluids, atropine & pacing 
 
CrackCast Show Notes – Plants, Mushrooms, and Herbal Medications – March 2018 
www.canadiem.org/crackcast 
 
 
 
Rhododendron 
 
 
Yew 
 
❏ Taxus species =  coniferous trees and shrubs  
❏ taxine pseudoalkaloids = sodium and calcium channel blockade 
❏ hypotension, dysrhythmias, and cardiac arrest. 
❏ Management = supportive. Consider ECMO 
 
 
European yew / common yew (Taxus baccata) 
 
 
[2] List 5 mushrooms with early onset toxicity and 3 with late onset – and 
describe the toxicity expected 
 
❏ Classified as 
❏ Early = 0-4hrs 
❏ Late onset = > 6hrs 
❏ Think most lethal = late 
❏ Early = C-GIMPS 
❏ Coprine 
❏ GI Toxin 
❏ Ibotenic Acid / muscimol 
❏ Psilocybin 
❏ Late = GOAA 
❏ Gyromitrin 
❏ Orellanine 
❏ Allenic norleucine 
❏ Amanita (cyclopeptides) 
 
CrackCast Show Notes – Plants, Mushrooms, and Herbal Medications – March 2018 
www.canadiem.org/crackcast 
 
 
 
❏ CNS / Hallucinogenic 
❏ Amanita Muscara (Ibotenic Acid / muscimol) 
❏ Psilocybe cubenis (Psilocybin) 
❏ Cholinergic 
❏ Clitocybe (muscarine) 
❏ Hepatotoxicity 
❏ Amanita philloides (cyclopeptides/amatoxin) “Death cap/angel” 
❏ Amnita Verosa  
❏ Lepiota 
❏ Disulfiram-like reaction w/ ETOH 
❏ Coprinus (Coprine) 
❏ Seizures 
❏ Gyrometria (GABA) 
❏ Renal 
❏ Cortinarius (orellanine) 
 
MNEMONIC: GO A PIC EM (relevant mushroom toxins) 
G: Gyrometrin O: Orellanine A: Amatoxin P: Psilocybin I: Ibotenic Acid  C: Coprine  E: Emetogenic (early GI 
group) M: Muscamol 
 
 
[3] List 4 mechanisms of toxicity resulting from the use of herbal medicine  
 
❏ Ephedra 
❏ sympathomimetic 
❏ Ma huang 
❏ sympathomimetic 
❏ Jimsonweed 
❏ anticholinergic 
❏ St John's Wart 
❏ MAOI 
❏ SS, decreases INR 
 
[4] List 4 plants containing cardiac glycosides 
 
FOLM 
 
❏ Foxglove 
❏ Oleander 
❏ Lilly of the Valley 
❏ Milkweed 
 
 
 
[5] What is Buckthorn?  
 
Poisonous fruit from the karwinskia humbold tianna commonly seen in SW USA and Mexico.  
 
● 
Toxicity 
○ 
Exposure: Ingestion 
○ 
Toxic agent: T-544 (Tullidinol) 
○ 
May uncouple oxidative phosphorylation 
● 
Epidemiology 
○ 
Ingestion of buckthorn fruit: Karwinskia humboldtiana 
○ 
Distribution: Southwestern U.S. & Mexico 
○ 
Children, cattle & goats most commonly affected 
■ 
Animal disease called "Limberleg": Incoordination & Ataxia 
CrackCast Show Notes – Plants, Mushrooms, and Herbal Medications – March 2018 
www.canadiem.org/crackcast 
 
 
■ 
Cattle most susceptible 
○ 
Severity of toxicity proportionate to amount of fruit ingested 
○ 
External links: Medicinal Plants; NatureServe 
● 
Neuropathy 
○ 
Onset 
■ 
Latent period: 5 to 20 days after ingestion 
■ 
Rapidly progressive 
■ 
General features: Fever; Cramps; Diarrhea; Headache 
○ 
Weakness 
■ 
Early: Legs > Arms 
■ 
Progression: Severe quadriparesis; Bulbar & respiratory involvement 
■ 
Cranial nerves: Normal 
○ 
Sensory loss: Mild; Distal 
○ 
CSF: Normal 
○ 
Course 
■ 
May improve spontaneously if supported through paralysis 
■ 
Over 3 to 12 months 
○ 
Pathology 
■ 
Segmental demyelination ± Axonal swelling & loss 
■ 
Experimental: Axonal loss (Motor) more prominent with systemic administration 
○ 
Diagnosis: History of ingestion of fruit; Exclusion of other causes 
● 
Systemic features 
○ 
Liver necrosis 
○ 
Occasional degeneration of skeletal & cardiac muscle fibers 
○ 
Micturition difficulty 
○ 
Muscle: Cramps; Cardiac change 
 
