# Metadata
- topic: 1.2 - Cardinal Presentations - 13 Weakness
- source_folder: 1.2 - Cardinal Presentations
- original_file: Ch.13 Weakness.pdf

Crack Cast Show Notes – Weakness – March 2016 
www.crackcast.org 
 
CrackCast Episode 13 – Weakness 
 
Episode overview:  
 
1) Compare upper motor neuron (UMN), lower motor neuron (LMN), and neuromuscular 
junction (NMJ) causes of weakness 
2) List 10 neuromuscular causes of weakness and describe their basic pathophysiologic 
mechanism 
3) What are warning signs of impending respiratory failure in a patient with neuromuscular 
weakness? 
 
Wisecracks:  
 
1) List seven non-emergent causes of peripheral neuropathy 
2) What are some causes of non-neuromuscular weakness? 
3) Clinical pearls for the weak patient  
 
Rosen’s in Perspective: 
 
There is “true” (objective) weakness (loss of strength from a neurologic or muscular disease 
process) and then there is a host of other processes that mimic neuromuscular weakness: 
cardiovascular, pulmonary, infectious, endocrine etc.  
Delineating the cause of weakness can be tricky, so having a structured approach to weakness 
is critical. We can differentiate between focal vs. generalised neuromuscular weakness, and 
then start looking for causes including lesions or processes affecting central or peripheral 
nerves, the neuromuscular junction, or the muscle fibers directly. 
Keep in mind that weakness caused by primary damage or dysfunction of the brain, spinal cord, 
peripheral nerves, and NMJ are rare, more common is secondary dysfunction from other 
medical conditions. 
 
1) Compare upper motor neuron (UMN), lower motor neuron (LMN), and 
neuromuscular junction (NMJ) causes of weakness 
 
Upper Motor Neuron (UMN) Lesion: 
**This is a lesion in the cerebral cortex or corticospinal tract of the brainstem and spinal cord.  
● spasticity to extension in upper extremities / flexion of lower extremities 
● hyper-reflexia 
Crack Cast Show Notes – Weakness – March 2016 
www.crackcast.org 
● pronator drift 
● Hoffmann’s sign (same as tinel’s sign) and Babinski’s 
sign (up going toes!) 
● normal muscle bulk 
 
Note: can’t always see these in the acute phase, but if you 
find even 1 of these, there is a problem with the CENTRAL 
nervous system 
Lower Motor Neuron (LMN) Lesion:  
** This is a lesion in the anterior horn, nerve root, axon, or 
peripheral nerve 
● flaccidity 
● hypo-reflexia 
● fasciculation 
● loss of muscle bulk 
 
Neuromuscular Junction (NMJ) Lesion: 
** Lesions here disrupt normal signalling from the pre-synaptic 
motor neuron to the post-synaptic muscle fiber 
Mix of signs: 
● slowly progressive or fluctuating signs 
● bulbar or ocular signs 
● mixed UMN and LMN pattern 
● bilateral proximal muscle weakness 
● loss of muscle bulk 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Image from 
http://www.youmedicine.arduanet.it/en/ 
Crack Cast Show Notes – Weakness – March 2016 
www.crackcast.org 
2) List 10 neuromuscular causes of weakness and describe their basic 
pathophysiologic mechanism 
 
 
3) What are warning signs of impending respiratory failure in a patient with 
neuromuscular weakness? 
 
 
climbing pCO2 
 
decreased LOC 
 
decreasing peak flows 
 
tachypnea 
 
respiratory distress with shallow respirations  
 
accessory muscle recruitment 
 
Wisecracks:  
 
1) List seven non-emergent causes of peripheral neuropathy 
 
1) Connective Tissue Disorder 
2) External Compression (entrapment syndrome, compressive plexopathy) 
3) Endocrinopathy (diabetes) 
4) Paraneoplastic Syndromes 
5) Toxins (alcohol) 
Table 13-1. Critical and Emergent Causes of Neuromuscular Weakness. 
Rosen's 8th Edition. Chapter 13 - page 125. 
Crack Cast Show Notes – Weakness – March 2016 
www.crackcast.org 
6) Trauma 
7) Vitamin Deficiency  
 
 
2) What are some causes of non-neuromuscular weakness? 
 
 
3) Clinical pearls for the weak patient  
 
1) tachypnea and shallow respirations signify impending respiratory failure – prepare for positive 
pressure ventilation 
2) sudden onset of focal weakness is a vascular cause until proven otherwise (differentiate 
occlusion vs. hemorrhage) 
3) presence of severe headache with unilateral weakness or midline back pain with lower 
extremity weakness is a compressive space-occupying lesion until proven otherwise. 
4) patients with UMN signs that have weakness that localizes to spinal cord or corticospinal tract 
are considered to have an emergent problem - this can lead to neurologic shock or obtundation 
(think enlarging space occupying lesions) 
5) the presence of anorectal or bladder insufficiency without other explanation suggests UMN 
lesion or cauda equina syndrome  
 
three classic signs of cauda equina : saddle paresthesia, urinary retention, and 
fecal incontinence (plus focal motor neuron deficit) 
6) lab tests are useful for excluding non-neuromuscular causes of weakness, with two 
exceptions: a CK in inflammatory myositis, a potassium level in channelopathies 
 
Box 13-1. Non-neurologic Weakness. Rosen's 8th Edition. Chapter 13 - page 125. 
