# Metadata
- topic: 1.2 - Cardinal Presentations - 28 Jaundice
- source_folder: 1.2 - Cardinal Presentations
- original_file: Ch.28 Jaundice.pdf

Crack Cast Show Notes – Jaundice – June 2016 
www.crackcast.org 
 
 
CrackCast Episode 28 – Jaundice 
 
Episode overview:  
 
1) Describe heme metabolism 
2) List common pre-hepatic/hepatic/post-hepatic causes of jaundice 
 
Wisecracks:  
 
1) What are clinical signs of liver disease? 
2) What laboratory tests can be useful in a jaundiced patient? 
3) List the triad of acute hepatic failure 
4) List and describe 6 critical causes of jaundice 
5) What are 3 causes of jaundice in pregnancy? 
 
1) Describe heme metabolism 
 
Jaundice = elevated serum bilirubin  
 
Normal bilirubin metabolism:  
 
• 
heme products (red blood cells) breaking down → bilirubin 
o very small portion of bilirubin comes from myoglobin (muscles) or maturing 
erythroid cells  
• 
heme products are oxidied into biliverdin → bilirubin 
• 
bilirubin binds to albumin, then is glucuronidated into the conjugated form in 
hepatocytes 
• 
conjugated bilirubin is excreted into the biliary system and emptied in the gut 
• 
colonic bacteria metabolize most conjugated bilirubin to urobilogen and stercobilin 
o stercobilin is excreted into the stool 
o urobilinogen is reabsorbed and is excreted into the urine 
• 
remaining conjugated bilirubin is de-conjugated and re-enters the portal circulation to be 
taken up again by hepatocytes 
o this completes the entero-hepatic circulation of bilirubin  
 
Conjugated bilirubin =  direct bilirubin 
Unconjugated bilirubin = indirect bilirubin (can cross blood brain barrier) – does not bind albumin 
Total bilirubin = direct + indirect  
 
Crack Cast Show Notes – Jaundice – June 2016 
www.crackcast.org 
 
Abnormal Bilirubin Metabolism 
Jaundice - usually not obvious until >25 mg/L 
• 
seen in tissues with high albumin concentrations 
o skin, eyes,  
o absent in tears, saliva  
 
Three pathologic processes leading to elevated bilirubin:  
1. Overproduction - high levels of heme production  
a. hemolysis  
b. hypoalbuminemia  
c. acidemia  
d. drugs  (bind competitively to albumin )  
2. Failure of conjugation - hepatocytes unable to take up, conjugate and excrete bilirubin  
a. hepatocellular dysfunction  
3. Decreased clearance   
a. biliary excretion problem  
 
● unconjugated levels of bilirubin that is not bound to albumin is able to cross the blood-
brain barrier  and leads to adverse neurologic effects  
○ developmental abnormalities, encephalopathy, death  
○ is exacerbated by any condition that leads to increased heme production or a 
process that competitively decreases albumin/binds to albumin (e.g. drugs or 
cirrhosis)  
● conjugated bilirubin in contrast is non-toxic  
 
 
2) List common pre-hepatic/hepatic/post-hepatic causes of jaundice 
 
Three pathologic processes leading to elevated bilirubin:  
1. Overproduction - high levels of heme production  
a. hemolysis  
b. hypoalbuminemia  
c. acidemia  
d. drugs  (bind competitively to albumin )  
 
2. Failure of conjugation - hepatocytes unable to take up, conjugate and excrete bilirubin  
a. hepatocellular dysfunction  
i. 
Toxins 
1. Tylenol, ETOH 
ii. 
Vascular:  
2. Budd-Chiari  
iii. 
Inflammatory/infectious 
Crack Cast Show Notes – Jaundice – June 2016 
www.crackcast.org 
 
3. Virus - hepatitis, autoimmune  
iv. 
Pregnancy related: HELLP /  acute fatty liver  
 
3. Decreased clearance  -  
a. biliary excretion problem  
i. 
Gallstone disease : CBD stone, ascending cholangitis  
 
Wisecracks:  
 
1) What are clinical signs of liver disease? 
 
Abnormalities in bilirubin metabolism:  
● Jaundice - usually not obvious until >25 mg/L 
○ seen in tissues with high albumin concentrations:  
■ skin, eyes,  
■ absent in tears, saliva  
Symptoms:  
● May be asymptomatic or have: 
○ pruritus, malaise, nausea  
● Jaundice with abdominal pain = biliary obstruction or hepatic inflammation  
● Jaundice WITHOUT abdominal pain = pancreatic neoplasm  
● Ask about fit of clothing (ascites) or personality changes  
 
Signs:  
● Skin  
○ Sublingual or conjunctival jaundice 
● Signs of liver disease: 
○ angiomas, excoriations, caput medusae, ascites, liver borders and texture, 
splenomegaly, neurologic examination, asterixis 
● Stages of encephalopathy – see table in Rosen’s  
 
2) What laboratory tests can be useful in a jaundiced patient? 
 
● GGT = confirms a hepatic source of ALP if ALP is up  
○ ALP can also be elevated from bone or placental sources  
● An elevated reticulocyte count can suggest hemolysis  
● Acetaminophen level*** (AST is first to rise) 
● Glucose level 
● Ammonia level - is of limited use and does NOT correlate with degrees of hepatic 
encephalopathy  
● Ascitic fluid - for analysis  
● Blood cultures - for fever 
Crack Cast Show Notes – Jaundice – June 2016 
www.crackcast.org 
 
● INR , PTT 
● AST, ALT 
 
3) List the triad of acute hepatic failure 
 
• 
Jaundice 
• 
Encephalopathy 
• 
Coagulopathy (INR > 1.5) 
 
4) List and describe 6 critical causes of jaundice 
 
1) Hepatic 
a) Fulminant hepatic failure  
b) Toxin 
c) Virus 
d) Alcohol 
e) Ischemic insult  
f) Reye’s syndrome  
2) Biliary 
a) Cholangitis (ascending infectious)  
3) Systemic  
a) Sepsis 
b) Heatstroke 
4) Cardiovascular  
a) Obstructing AAA 
b) Budd-Chiari syndrome  
c) Severe congestive heart failure  
5) Heme-oncologic  
a) Transfusion reaction (hemolysis)  
6) Reproductive  
a) Pre-eclampsia or HELLP syndrome  
b)  Acute fatty liver of pregnancy 
 
Empirical management  
● Depends on the cause of jaundice and problem: 
○ Bleeding (in the context of coagulopathy) 
■ Transfuse PRBC’s and FFP 
○ Spontaneous bacterial peritonitis  
■ >250 PMN’s per cm3 of ascitic fluid  
● IV ceftriaxone  
○ Acetaminophen toxicity: 
Crack Cast Show Notes – Jaundice – June 2016 
www.crackcast.org 
 
■ N-acetylcysteine  
○ Ascending cholangitis  
■ Antibiotics  
■ ***need acute biliary drainage in 24-48 hrs because most antibiotics are 
excreted*** 
○ Choledocolithiasis or strictures 
■ Need for ERCP  
■ ***neither CT or U/S is 100% sensitive for choledocolithasis, but a dilated 
CBD highly suggests obstruction*** 
○ Immune-mediated hemolytic anemia:  
■ Transfuse only if unable to oxygenate and in discussion with hematology  
■ Remove any potential offending drugs in the case of G6PD 
 
 
5) What are 3 causes of jaundice in pregnancy? 
 
● Pregnancy and jaundice = pathology  
○ Potential causes:  
○ 1) hyperemesis gravidarum  
■ In the first trimester - ?poor nutrition and impaired bilirubin excretion  
■ Can have VERY high transaminases (20x ULN)  
■ Trxt: fluids and antiemetics and admission if biochemically deranged  
○ 2) acute fatty liver of pregnancy 
■ In the 3rd trimester  
■ Due to microvascular fat accumulation in the liver 
■ S+s: 
● Nausea, vomiting, anorexia, jaundice 
■ May progress to fulminant hepatic failure 
■ Trxt: delivery, patients may need liver transplant! 
○ 3) intrahepatic cholestasis of pregnancy  
■ Idiopathic cause of jaundice in 2-3rd trimester  
■ S+s: 
● Pruritis - trunk, extremities, palms, soles.  
● Acholic stools and dark urine  
■ Increased risk of preterm labour or early fetal demise intra-uterine.  
■ Trxt:  
● Ursodiol, cholestyramine 
● Vitamin K 
 
