# Metadata
- topic: 2.2 - System Injuries - 43 Spinal Trauma
- source_folder: 2.2 - System Injuries
- original_file: Ch.43 Spinal Trauma.pdf

Crack Cast Show Notes – Spinal Injuries – October 2016 
www.crackcast.org 
 
 
                              
Chapter 43 - Spinal Injuries 
Episode Overview 
1) Describe the anatomical contents of the anterior and posterior spinal columns 
2) List cervical spinal injuries for the following mechanisms, and indicated whether they 
are stable or unstable 
a. Flexion x 6 
b. Shear / AP forces x 1 
c. Flexion-Rotation x 2 
d. Extension x 3 
e. Vertical Compression x 2 
3) List 8 unstable C-spine injuries 
4) Describe an approach to C-Spine X-rays, and define normal:  
a. Predental space 
b. Soft-tissue spaces 
c. Line of Swischuck 
5) Describe Canadian C-Spine Rule + Nexus Rule 
6) Describe incomplete cord lesions 
7) Describe: 
a. Wallenburgs Syndrome 
b. Dejeune Onion Skin Pattern of Analgesia 
c. Horners Syndrome 
d. Cauda Equina 
8) How does the bulbocavernosus reflex reflect the presence of spinal shock 
9) List features of sacral sparing 
10) List Dermatomes/ Myotomes / Spinal reflexes 
11) List 6 causes of Horner’s 
12) For what C-spine injuries is a CT-a indicated to R/O vascular injury 
13) Are Steroids indicated for C-spine injuries 
14) For whom is surgical intervention indicated immediately with a spinal cord injury 
15) Define neurogenic shock and describe its management 
16) Define spinal shock 
17) What is the risk of cervical injury in Down’s Syndrome? Rheumatoid Arthritis? 
18) What are the Denver criteria? 
 
 
 
 
Rosen’s in Perspective 
● MVC’s are 40% of spinal injuries 
○ Rf’s speeding, ETOH and failure to use restraints 
● Other common causes in order: falls, violence, sporting activities 
● 80% of spinal injuries are men 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Crack Cast Show Notes – Spinal Injuries – October 2016 
www.crackcast.org 
 
 
                              
Questions 
1) Describe the anatomical contents of the anterior, middle and 
posterior spinal columns (aka 3 column model of Denis) 
• 
Anterior: alternative vertebral bodies and intervertebral disks surrounded by annulus 
fibrosis and anterior longitudinal ligament 
 
• 
Middle: posterior portion of annulus and post vertebral wall, posterior longitudinal 
ligament, spinal cord, paired laminae and pedicles, articulating facets, transverse 
process, nerve roots and vertebral artery and veins 
 
• 
Posterior: spinous processes, nuchal ligament, interspinous and supraspinous 
ligaments and ligamentum flavum 
2) List cervical spinal injuries for the following mechanisms, and 
indicated whether they are stable or unstable: 
o Flexion - From top down 
§ 
Atlanto-occipital or atlantoaxial joint dislocation (+/- odontoid #) 
• 
Unstable due to lack or relative muscle and ligamentous support 
§ 
Simple wedge injury 
• 
Stable provided posterior column remains intact and loss of no more than half 
vertebral height or multiple in a row 
§ 
Flexion teardrop - flexion forces cause anterior displacement of small wedge 
• 
Highly unstable - usually involves anterior and posterior ligament disruption 
§ 
Clay-Shoveler’s fracture: named as such for miner lifting a heavy shovelful in 
forced flexion, now MC is forced deceleration in MVC’s 
• 
Oblique fracture of base of spinous process - stable as single column 
§ 
Spinal subluxation - pure ligamentous disruption often very subtle 
• 
Potentially unstable depending on degree of ligamentous injury 
§ 
Bilateral facet dislocations - flexion force disrupts all the soft tissue resulting in 
anterior displacement above spinal level 
• 
Extremely unstable 
o Shear / AP forces 
§ 
Shear injuries occur with trauma to the head can result in odontoid fractures. 
Three types of odontoid fracture Type I-III indicated the level of fracture, and 
coincidentally the level of stability (from mostly unstable to fully instable) 
Crack Cast Show Notes – Spinal Injuries – October 2016 
www.crackcast.org 
 
 
                              
• 
Upper part of odontoid peg 
• 
Base of odontoid peg 
• 
Odontoid into the lateral mass of C2 
 
o Flexion-Rotation x 2 
§ 
Rotary atlantoaxial dislocation - best visualized with an open-mouth odontoid 
view as lateral asymmetry between odontoid and the base of C2. 
• 
Unstable 
§ 
Unilateral facet dislocation - Flexion rotation injury where the facet acts as a 
fulcrum, causing contralateral facet to dislocate.  They key in the ED is often 
torticollis, as the patient neck is mechanically locked in a twisted position 
• 
Stable 
 
o Extension x 3 
§ 
Posterior neural arch fracture - fracture of neural arch of c1 (just look it up…) from 
compression of posterior elements of c2 
• 
Unstable 2ndary to location 
§ 
Hangman’s fracture - classically described as forced extension against a noose, 
this traumatic spondylosis of both pedicles of c2, now more commonly seen in 
MVC 
• 
Technically unstable, but often without cord damage secondary to the very 
large neural canal diameter here 
§ 
Extension teardrop - abrupt extension results in ALL pulling off corner of anterior 
body.  Usually associated with diving injuries. 
• 
Unstable in extension and can have central cord syndrome as ligamentum 
flavum buckles into cord 
 
o Vertical Compression - forces from above or below 
§ 
Burst fracture - appears like wedge compression fracture, but typically <40% 
height. CT or MRI will show fragmented body. 
• 
Stable but may impinge on anterior cord 
§ 
Jefferson Fracture - an eponymous fracture for a British neurologist who 
described this fracture. I like to think perhaps he was a weekend cliff diver, as this 
fracture is often seen with shallow water dives. Quite literally this is a 
compression force on c1 which bursts open the arch of the atlas.  Diagnosis is oft 
made on CT but an open mouth view with c1 lateral masses > 7mm from 
odontoid peg is diagnostic. 
• 
Extremely unstable 
 
3. List 8 unstable C-spine injuries 
 
● Jumping off awnings nearly warrants frank spinal trauma 
○ Jefferson 
○ Odontoid fracture 
○ Atlanto-occipital dislocation 
○ Neural arch (posterior) 
○ Wedge fracture 
○ Large, facet dislocation 
○ Bilateral 
○ Spinal subluxation, 
○ Tear drop 
 
 
 
Crack Cast Show Notes – Spinal Injuries – October 2016 
www.crackcast.org 
 
 
                              
4. Describe an approach to C-Spine X-rays, and define normal:  
a. Predental space 
b. Soft-tissue spaces 
c. Line of Swischuck 
 
 
STEP ONE: Choose your type  
3 main X-rays: Lateral, AP, and odontoid view.  
• 
Additional view: swimmers view 
o Useful for assessing cervical-thoraco junction (c7 to T1).  
• 
Oblique view? Flex-EX? Forget it - if your suspicion of a fracture is this high, get the 
CT. Leave these other views to delayed imaging for specialist use 
 
Second: ABC’s of lateral C/S films 
● Alignment - 3 lines of the c/s. Anterior, posterior margins of vertebral bodies and 
spinolaminal line.  Any disruption in these lines suggests a fracture 
○ Note exception is pseudo subluxation c2/c3 in young children secondary to 
hypermobile spine. Line of swischuk: line is drawn from anterior aspect of 
posterior arch of C1 to anterior aspect of posterior arch of C3. If distance 
between line is >2mm out - this can be fracture in child 
● Bony abnormalities.  Look for area of decreased density first as in patients with RA, 
Osteoporosis or metastatic lesions, as they are more likely to fracture. Then look for 
increase in density suggesting compression fracture 
● Cartilage space - pay attention to intervertebral spacing as this may indication 
subluxation or dislocation 
○ Predental space: space between the tubercle of C1 and anterior face of the 
dens.  Maximum 3mm in adults, 5mm in children. Widening of this space 
suggests atlantoaxial dislocation, but can be normal in conditions which 
cause ligamentous laxity or bony disruption such as downs syndrome and RA 
● S for Soft tissue spaces 
○ 6/2 Rule - 6mm at C2 or 22mm at C6. Increases in these soft tissue distances 
can indicate prevertebral swelling and hemorrhage. At C3 and C4 its 5mm. 
■ Children: 6mm at C2, 14mm at c6… pesky small people 
 
Third: Odontoid view 
● View is adequate if you see lateral processes of c1 and c2 
● Looks for distance between peg and c1 lateral masses, should be equal 
● Look for subtle fractures of odontoid 
 
Forth: AP view - less useful 
● Alignment - lateral edges of the C-spine and spinous process should form straight 
line 
● Bony abnormalities - look at each vertebra for fracture lines 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Crack Cast Show Notes – Spinal Injuries – October 2016 
www.crackcast.org 
 
 
                              
5) Describe Canadian C-Spine Rule + Nexus Rule 
 
CCS: prospective cohort study in Canadian adults presenting to tertiary care hospitals with 
acute trauma to the head or neck with GCS 15. Required one of the following: neck pain, or 
no neck pain + all of (injury above clavicles, non ambulatory and dangerous mechanism).  
Ian Stiels group generated a decision rule with sensitivity of 99.7% and specificity of 50.7 %.  
 
 
 
Crack Cast Show Notes – Spinal Injuries – October 2016 
www.crackcast.org 
 
 
                              
Nexus rule: US single centre cohort (UCLA) of adult patients who suffered blunt trauma but 
sensitivity of 99.6, specificity of 12.9. Any of the following criteria mandates consideration for 
imaging of the C/S: 
● Focal Neurologic Deficit Present 
● Midline Spinal Tenderness Present 
● Altered Level of Consciousness Present  
● Intoxication Present 
● Distracting Injury Present 
 
6. Describe incomplete cord lesions 
 
3 major types (account for 90% of incomplete injuries) 
1. Central cord syndrome 
○ Buckling of ligamentum flavour in patients with degenerative arthritis 
and hyperextension. Ligamentum flavum contuses the central grey 
matter.  As distal nerve innervate the lower limbs, patients have 
relative sparing of the legs, however in severe cases only sacral 
sparing is seen. 50% become ambulatory again 
2. Anterior Cord Syndrome 
○ Hyperflexion or protrusion of bone/disk into canal or loss of anterior 
spinal canal (paresthesias and hyperalgesia with preservation of 
posterior column (position, touch, vibratory). Fast NS consult 
warranted for possible surgical fixes, as recovery is mostly within first 
24 hours. 
3. Brown-Sequard 
○ Hemisection (lateral) of spinal cord. Often from penetrating trauma, 
but also masses. Results in ipsilateral loss of position, vibration and 
motor. Contralateral loss of pain and temperature.  Pain and 
temperature loss may be variable in distribution and fibers cross over 
variable one or two segments above.  Most patients become 
ambulatory again. 
 
7. Describe 
d. Wallenburgs Syndrome (aka lateral medullary syndrome) 
i. Loss of PICA circulation to the brain… remember your 
anatomy…PICA supplied by vertebral artery. Results in ischemia to 
lateral medulla = wallowing difficulty, or dysphagia, slurred speech, 
ataxia, facial pain, vertigo, nystagmus, Horner's syndrome, diplopia, 
ataxia. 
e. Dejeune Onion Skin Pattern of Analgesia 
i. Damage to the spinal trigeminal tract = facial pain 
ii. Other fun fact: the only link on google to this phenomenon links BACK 
to Rosen’s… so don’t ask me why ‘onion skin’ 
f. 
Horners Syndrome 
i. Miosis, ptosis, anhydrosis. Damage to ipsilateral sympathetic cervical 
chain. 
 
g. Cauda Equina 
i. Every med student knows this one… bladder or bowel dysfunction, 
saddle paresthesias, diminished rectal tone, lower extremity 
weakness. 
 
 
Crack Cast Show Notes – Spinal Injuries – October 2016 
www.crackcast.org 
 
 
                              
8. How does the bulbocavernosus reflex reflect the presence of spinal 
shock? 
What is spinal shock? 
• Clinical syndrome characterised by temporary loss of neurologic function and 
autonomic tone below lesion.  Lasts 24 hours to 2 weeks, and is heralded by the 
return of the bulbocavernosus reflex. 
 
9. List features of sacral sparing 
a. Perianal sensation 
b. Rectal motor function 
c. Great toe flexor activity 
 
ASIA Classification Table 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Crack Cast Show Notes – Spinal Injuries – October 2016 
www.crackcast.org 
 
 
                              
10. List Dermatomes/ Myotomes / Spinal reflexes 
 
 
Crack Cast Show Notes – Spinal Injuries – October 2016 
www.crackcast.org 
 
 
                              
 
 
 
 
Crack Cast Show Notes – Spinal Injuries – October 2016 
www.crackcast.org 
 
 
                              
 
 
 
11. List 6 causes of Horner’s Syndrome 
1. MS 
2. Encephalitis 
3. Tumours 
4. Lateral medullary syndrome 
5. Thyroid masses or removal 
6. Trauma to base of neck 
7. Pancoast tumor, 
8. Thoracic aneurysm 
9. Sympathectomy 
 
12. For what C-spine injuries is CT-A indicated to rule out vascular injury 
1. C1-C3 # 
2. Any vertebral body fracture 
3. Transverse foramen fracture 
4. Facet sub/dislocation 
5. Ligamentous injury 
 
• 
This likely varies on a per institution basis 
 
13. Are steroids indicated for C-spine injuries? 
• 
Highly controversial - Cochrane review says yes, almost all other sources (guidelines 
and surveys) say no. Talk to your surgeon.  
• 
Common dose is 30mg/kg IV methylprednisolone then infusion  @ 5.4mg / kg/hr. 
Variable length of infusion 
 
14. For whom is surgical intervention indicated immediately with a spinal 
cord injury? 
• Impingement on spinal cord by foreign bodies, herniated disks, bony fracture 
fragments or epidural hematoma 
 
15. Define neurogenic shock and describe its management 
o I prefer neurogenic hypotension (newest version of Rosen’s uses this). In 
contradistinction to spinal shock (see above), neurogenic hypotension is loss of 
vasomotor tone and lack of reflex tachycardia from disruption of autonomic ganglia. 
o Should only be considered IF: 
o Flaccid and areflexic 
o Reflex tachycardia and peripheral vasoconstriction absent 
o Exclusion of hemorrhage, tamponade, and tension pneumothorax 
 
Crack Cast Show Notes – Spinal Injuries – October 2016 
www.crackcast.org 
 
 
                              
16. Define spinal shock 
• 
As mentioned earlier - temporary loss of neurologic function and autonomic tone 
below the level of an acute spinal cord lesion 
 
17. What is the risk of cervical injury in Down’s Syndrome? Rheumatoid 
Arthritis? 
o Atlantoaxial instability leading to subluxation or dislocation for both  - both diseases 
involve ligament laxity 
 
18. What are the Denver criteria? 
High risk vertebral signs and symptoms 
1) Any cervical spine fracture  
2) Unexplained neurological deficit incongruous with imaging  
3) Basilar cranial fracture into carotid canal  
4) Le Fort II or III fracture  
5) Cervical haematoma  
6) Horner syndrome  
7) Cervical bruit  
8) Ischaemic stroke  
9) Head injury with Glasgow Coma Scale score<6  
10) Hanging with anoxic injury 
