# Metadata
- topic: 1.1 - Critical Management Principles - 9 Adult Resus
- source_folder: 1.1 - Critical Management Principles
- original_file: Ch.9 Adult Resus.pdf

 
CrackCast Show Notes – Adult Resuscitation – March 2019 
www.canadiem.org/crackcast 
 
 
Episode 199 
Chapter 8 – Adult Resuscitation 
 
NOTE: CONTENT CONTAINED IN THIS DOCUMENT IS TAKEN FROM 
ROSEN’S EMERGENCY MEDICINE 9th Ed.  
 
Italicized text is quoted directly from Rosen’s.  
 
Key Concepts: 
1.
CPR quality is critical to successful resuscitation from cardiac arrest. Important 
benchmarks of quality CPR include compression rate between 100 and 120 
compressions/min, compression depth of 5 to 6 cm, chest compression fraction of 80% 
or more, full chest recoil, and ventilation rate of 10 breaths/min. 
2.
Restoration of adequate cardiac function is the defining factor of ROSC. Restoration of 
good neurologic function is the defining factor of successful resuscitation. 
3.
Resuscitation of a cardiac arrest victim does not end with ROSC. Rapid diagnosis and 
proper management of the pathologic conditions that precipitated and resulted from the 
arrest, as well as goal-directed post–cardiac arrest care, can improve outcome. 
4.
Immediate PCI is indicated in patients with demonstrated ST segment elevation MI 
following ROSC without regard to neurological status. 
5.
Hypothermic targeted temperature management (32°–36° C for 24 hours) is the first and 
only post-ROSC intervention that has been shown to improve survival and functional 
outcome of comatose cardiac arrest survivors. 
 
Core Questions:  
 
1.
Describe your history and physical exam in the patient being actively resuscitated. 
2.
Discuss the process of deterioration to cardiac arrest with respiratory failure and cardiac 
obstruction. 
3.
List 6 aspects of optimal CPR. 
4.
What medications have been shown to improve outcomes in cardiac arrest? 
5.
List 8 differential diagnoses for PEA arrest (See Table 8.4) 
6.
What is electromechanical dissociation (EMD) and how does it differ from pseudo 
electromechanical dissociation (pseudo EMD)? 
7.
What is echo-guided life support (EGLS) and how is it used? 
8.
What are your targets during CPR for the following metrics? (See Table 8.3) 
a.
Carotid or femoral pulse 
 
CrackCast Show Notes – Adult Resuscitation – March 2019 
www.canadiem.org/crackcast 
 
 
 
b.
CPP 
c.
Arterial relaxation (diastolic) pressure 
d.
PETCO2 
e.
SCVO2 
 
Wisecracks:  
 
1.
What is cough CPR and when should it be used? 
2.
What is the only antidysrhythmic shown to improve rates of VF conversion to a perfusing 
rhythm? 
3.
What is the minimum coronary perfusion pressure (CPP) is needed to achieve return of 
spontaneous circulation (ROSC)? 
4.
What is the triad of cardiac arrest? 
 
Rosen’s in Perspective 
 
Alright guys, we are back at it. As practitioners of emergency medicine, we are expected to be 
masters of the resuscitation game. As such, we must go about taking it upon ourselves to 
ensure our life-saving interventions are exactly that… life saving. Our podcast today will go 
about giving you information that will better inform your resuscitative efforts and will better help 
you to recall physiologic endpoints to guide further management of your sickest patients.  
 
It is important to note here that we will not be reviewing ACLS algorithms in our podcast today. 
We ask that you take it upon yourself to review those to compliment your learning. Additionally, 
we want to stress the importance of using this podcast in conjunction with textbook readings 
and the flashcard set available on CanadiEM to enhance your learning. It is like Owen and I 
always say - spaced repetition is key.  
 
Core Questions: 
 
[1] Describe your history and physical exam in the patient being actively 
resuscitated. 
 
History:  
●Exact time of arrest 
●Witnessed vs unwitnessed arrest 
●Bystander CPR 
●CPR duration – crucial 
●ECG rhythm  
 
CrackCast Show Notes – Adult Resuscitation – March 2019 
www.canadiem.org/crackcast 
 
●Prehospital interventions  
●past medical/psychiatric history 
●drug ingestion or environmental exposures? do we need to give an 
antidote? 
●Allergies 
Physical Exam  
Head to toe: 
●
 Primary Survey ABCDE …  
●
 airway secretions and ease of ventilation abdominal exam 
●
 Consideration for rectal exam (r/o massive GI bleed) 
TABLE 8.2 Physical Examination Findings​a  
PHYSICAL 
EXAMINATION 
ABNORMALITIES 
POTENTIAL CAUSES 
General 
Pallor 
Hemorrhage 
Cold 
Hypothermia 
Airway 
Secretions, vomitus, or 
blood 
Aspiration 
 
Airway obstruction 
Resistance to 
positive-pressure 
ventilation 
Tension pneumothorax 
Airway obstruction 
 
Bronchospasm 
Neck 
Jugular venous distention 
Tension pneumothorax 
 
Cardiac tamponade 
 
Pulmonary embolus 
 
CrackCast Show Notes – Adult Resuscitation – March 2019 
www.canadiem.org/crackcast 
 
Tracheal deviation 
Tension pneumothorax 
Chest 
Median sternotomy scar 
Underlying cardiac disease 
Lungs 
Unilateral breath sounds 
Tension pneumothorax 
 
Right mainstem intubation 
 
Aspiration 
Distant or no breath 
sounds or no chest 
expansion 
Esophageal intubation 
Airway obstruction 
 
Severe bronchospasm 
Wheezing 
Aspiration 
 
Bronchospasm 
 
Pulmonary edema 
Rales 
Aspiration 
 
Pulmonary edema 
 
Pneumonia 
Heart 
Diminished heart tones 
Hypovolemia 
 
Cardiac tamponade 
 
Tension pneumothorax 
 
Pulmonary embolus 
 
CrackCast Show Notes – Adult Resuscitation – March 2019 
www.canadiem.org/crackcast 
 
 
Abdomen 
Distended and dull 
Ruptured abdominal aortic 
aneurysm or ruptured ectopic 
pregnancy 
Distended, tympanitic 
Esophageal intubation 
Gastric insufflation 
 
Rectal 
Blood, melena 
Gastrointestinal hemorrhage 
Extremities 
Asymmetrical pulses 
Aortic dissection 
Arteriovenous shunt or 
fistula 
Hyperkalemia 
Skin 
Needle tracks or 
abscesses 
Intravenous drug abuse 
Burns 
Smoke inhalation 
 
Electrocution 
 
 
[2] Discuss the process of deterioration to cardiac arrest with respiratory 
failure, cardiac obstruction, and hypovolemia. 
 
Respiratory Failure:  
 
Primary respiratory failure leads to hypertension and tachycardia initially, followed by 
hypotension and bradycardia, progressing to PEA, VF, or asystole. 
 
Cardiac Obstruction 
 
Circulatory obstruction (eg, tension pneumothorax, pericardial tamponade) and hypovolemia 
lead to tachycardia and hypotension initially, progressing through bradycardia and then to PEA, 
but may deteriorate to VF or asystole as well. 
 
 
CrackCast Show Notes – Adult Resuscitation – March 2019 
www.canadiem.org/crackcast 
 
 
 
 
[3] List 6 aspects of optimal CPR. 
 
1.
Place two hands over lower half of sternum  
2.
Compression rate (100–120 compressions/min) 
3.
Compression depth (5–6 cm) 
4.
Chest compression fraction ≥80%  (CPR performed 80 out of every 100 seconds) or limit 
interruptions to less than 10 seconds 
5.
Full chest recoil  
6.
Proper ventilation rate (10 breaths ventilations/min) 
 
Throwing back to original episode:  P’s of high quality CPR: placement, 
pace, pressure, pauses, and puffs (don’t over ventilate) 
 
 
[4] What medications have been shown to improve outcomes in cardiac 
arrest? 
From the book:  
“Pharmacologic therapy during CPR improves the proportion of patients who achieve ROSC.​17 
However, there is yet to be a randomized prospective placebo-controlled clinical trial that has 
been adequately powered to determine if pharmacologic therapy during CPR improves 
long-term survival or neurologic outcome.”  
 
That trial has since been done - PARAMEDIC-2 showed an increased likelihood of ROSC in 
patients who received epi compared to those that didn’t. However, there was no increase in 30 
day survival or survival to hospital discharge with favourable neurologic outcome. (Rebel EM 
Summary ​here​).  
 
Also in Rosen’s  
“For refractory VF or pVT, antidysrhythmics can be administered up to their maximum loading 
dose. Amiodarone (300 mg IV) is the only antidysrhythmic agent that has been shown to 
improve the rate of VF conversion to a perfusing rhythm.”  
 
However, according to the ​2018 AHA Focused Update on ACLS​, both amiodarone and 
lidocaine can be considered to treat shock-refractory VF or VT.  
 
[5] List 8 differential diagnoses for PEA arrest (See Table 8.4) 
 
Alright, so let’s set the scene. You are working a nice weekend afternoon shift - things have 
been fairly quiet thus far. As soon as you go to take a sip of your coffee, EMS rolls in the door 
 
CrackCast Show Notes – Adult Resuscitation – March 2019 
www.canadiem.org/crackcast 
 
with a patient in PEA. They have gone through the ACLS algorithm twice already, and the 
patient remains in that rhythm. WHAT ARE YOU GOING TO DO? 
 
Don’t sweat it, we got you. When considering the differential diagnosis for PEA arrest, it is 
important to have a concise manner to conceptualize and address the potential causes of said 
arrhythmia. Luckily, Rosen’s presents a concise table that will allow you to work through the 
major causes of PEA arrest. Of note, we have adapted the list to include both hypo- and 
hyperkalemia, and both PE and MI to mirror the causes noted in the ACLS algorithm. 
 
The following table has been adapted from Table 8.4 in Rosen’s Emergency Medicine, 9th 
Edition.  
 
 
 
 
 
CAUSE 
DIAGNOSIS 
PALLIATIVE 
THERAPY 
DEFINITIVE 
THERAPY 
Hypovolemia 
Response to volume 
infusion 
Volume infusion 
Hemostasis if 
hemorrhage 
Hypoxia 
Response to 
oxygenation 
Oxygenation, 
assisted ventilation 
Treat underlying 
cause 
Hypothermia 
Rectal temperature 
 
Warm peritoneal or 
thoracic lavage, 
venoarterial ECMO 
Hyperkalemia 
History of renal failure 
or elevated serum 
potassium level 
Calcium chloride, 
insulin and glucose, 
sodium bicarbonate 
Hemodialysis 
Hypokalemia 
Serum Potassium, U 
waves/prolonged QTc 
on ECG, history of poor 
intake or losses 
 
Potassium 
supplementation 
Acidosis 
Arterial blood gas 
Hyperventilation, 
sodium bicarbonate 
Treat underlying 
cause 
Cardiac 
Tamponade 
Echocardiogram; 
jugular venous 
Pericardiocentesis 
Thoracotomy and 
pericardiotomy 
 
CrackCast Show Notes – Adult Resuscitation – March 2019 
www.canadiem.org/crackcast 
 
 
 
distention 
Toxicity 
History of drug 
ingestion 
Drug-specific 
Drug-specific 
Tension 
Pneumothorax 
Asymmetric breath 
sounds, tracheal 
deviation 
Needle 
thoracostomy 
Tube thoracostomy 
 Thrombus 
Formation - PE 
Risk factors or 
evidence of deep 
venous thrombosis 
Venoarterial ECMO 
Lytic therapy, 
pulmonary 
embolectomy 
Thrombus 
Formation - MI 
STEMI, Heart Block, or 
VF arrest 
DAPT +/- lytic 
depending on 
availability of cath lab  
Angiography and 
revascularization 
 
 
[6] What is electromechanical dissociation (EMD) and how does it differ 
from pseudo electromechanical dissociation (pseudo EMD)? 
 
True EMD  
 
●
Cause: abnormal automaticity and conduction. Associated with global myocardial 
depression and acidosis 2ndary to ischemia or hypoxia  
●
Rhythm: bradycardia with wide QRS complex  
●
This typically occurs after defib following prolonged VF. 
●
Associated with: hyperkalemia, hypothermia, drug OD  
 
Pseudo EMD 
 
●
The step before true EMD…  
●
Has all the same causes as true EMD. Additional causes of pseudo EMD include 
papillary mm rupture and myocardial wall rupture (ventricle contracting but forward flow 
severely reduced), hypovolemia, tension PTX, tamponade, massive PE.  
●
Pseudo EMD of extracardiac origin is typically ​narrow and tachycardic​, progressing to 
bradycardia and wide QRS  
 
[7] What is echo-guided life support (EGLS) and how is it used? 
 
5 clinical questions to be applied to patient in shock/extremis  
At each stage - consider associated diagnoses and treatments  
 
CrackCast Show Notes – Adult Resuscitation – March 2019 
www.canadiem.org/crackcast 
 
 
 
1. Is there PTX  
a. US: lung slide, lung point  
b. Rx: needle decompression/finger thoracostomy, tube thoracostomy  
2. Is tamponade present?  
a. US: pericardial effusion, fixed dilated IVC, RA and RV diastolic 
collapse  
b. Rx: pericardiocentesis, thoracotomy, pericardotomy  
3. Is patient hypovolemic?  
a. US: no or few B lines, hyperdynamic LV, collapsible IVC  
b. Rx: volume infusion  
4. Is LV dysfunction main cause of shock  
a. US: Hypokinetic LV, B lines, fixed and dilated IVC  
b. Rx: pressors and inotropes  
5. Is there RV strain?  
a. US: RV dilation, D sign, paradoxical septal wall movement, fixed and 
dilated IVC  
b. Rx: consider thrombolysis, DVT search, further diagnostic workup for 
PE/MI, consider pulmonary hypertension  
 
https://www.echoguidedlifesupport.com 
 
 
[8] What are your targets during CPR for the following metrics? (See Table 
8.3) 
f. Carotid or femoral pulse 
g. CPP 
h. Arterial relaxation (diastolic) pressure 
i.
PETCO2 
j.
SCVO2 
 
Alright, guys. Rapid fire here. Knowing this list will better arm you for your next critical care pimp 
session and will give you physiologic parameters to steward the resuscitation process. We have 
adapted Table 8.3 in Rosen’s to give you targets to reach as opposed to a list of values to avoid 
- enjoy. 
 
 
CrackCast Show Notes – Adult Resuscitation – March 2019 
www.canadiem.org/crackcast 
 
 
 
 
The following table has been adapted from Table 8.3 in Rosen’s Emergency Medicine, 9th 
Edition.  
 
Monitoring Technique 
Indicator 
Carotid or femoral pulse 
Present 
CPP 
>15 mmHg 
Arterial relaxation (diastolic) 
pressure 
> 20-25 mmHg 
PETCO2 
>10 mmHg 
ScvO2 
> 40% 
 
 
 
Wisecracks:  
 
[1] What is cough CPR and when should it be used? 
 
Cough CPR may sound like something you do to resuscitate your best friend that has just 
choked on that stray Dorito after seeing that hilarious meme you posted, but it is actually a 
resuscitation strategy that you can use to save a life. 
 
As per Rosen’s, cough CPR is best used in the patient who enters into ventricular fibrillation or 
pulseless ventricular tachycardia while on cardiac monitors. The patient should be constructed 
to cough “vigorously” until a defibrillator is available. There is some evidence to suggest that this 
strategy can keep a patient conscious for up to a minute or longer.  
 
[2] What is the only antidysrhythmic shown to improve rates of ventricular 
fibrillation conversion to a perfusing rhythm? 
 
For all you guys thinking that the answer to this question was epinephrine, you are wrong. In 
cases of refractory ventricular fibrillation, amiodarone dosed at 300 mg IV is the ONLY 
antidysrhythmic to improve rates of conversion to a perfusing rhythm. 
 
[3] What is the minimum coronary perfusion pressure (CPP) is needed to 
achieve return of spontaneous circulation (ROSC)? 
 
CrackCast Show Notes – Adult Resuscitation – March 2019 
www.canadiem.org/crackcast 
 
 
 
 
Some spaced repetition here, CRACKCast listeners. Remember, you want to target coronary 
perfusion pressure to 15 mmHg or more during resuscitation. This is the recommended value 
given the results of human and animal studies that identified a minimum CPP of at least 15 mm 
Hg to achieve return of spontaneous circulation.  
 
[4] What is the triad of cardiopulmonary arrest? 
 
We are easing you out of the podcast with this one. The triad of cardiopulmonary is as follows: 
unconsciousness, apnea, and pulselessness.  
 
If there is any suspicion that the patient is in cardiac arrest, CPR should be started immediately. 
Also, be sure to use a large artery to assess for pulselessness, as distal pulses become faint 
and undetectable at lower mean arterial pressures. 
 
 
 
 
