# Metadata
- topic: 3.12 - ID - CrackCast-Shownotes-Episode-138-Sepsis-Syndromes
- source_folder: 3.12 - ID
- original_file: CrackCast-Shownotes-Episode-138-Sepsis-Syndromes.pdf

CrackCast Show Notes – Sepsis Syndromes – December 2017 
www.canadiem.org/crackcast 
 
 
Chapter 138 – Sepsis Syndromes 
 
Episode Overview: 
 
1. Define SIRS, Sepsis, Severe Sepsis, and Septic Shock 
2. Describe Early Goal Directed Therapy 
3. What is Sepsis 3.0 
4. Discuss the Surviving Sepsis Guidelines 
5. List doses and indications for commonly used vasoactive medications 
6. Describe empiric Abx regimens for typical sources of sepsis 
7. Define ARDS 
8. Describe the ED approach to managing ARDS 
 
Wisecracks 
 
1) Outline key priorities in diagnostic workup and management of the septic patient 
during the first 6 hours of emergency care.  
2) What is HLH?  
 
Key Points: 
 
❏ Sepsis is a progression of disease due to a dysregulated inflammatory cascade, 
leading to organ dysfunction and circulatory compromise in severe cases. 
❏ Sepsis is subtle and often difficult to detect, so the emergency clinician should 
maintain a high index of suspicion when assessing patients in the ED. 
❏ Older adults, immunocompromised and neutropenic patients, and patients with 
multiple comorbidities are at increased risk for the development of sepsis syndromes. 
❏ A thorough history and physical examination should guide the diagnostic evaluation. 
❏ Early treatment should focus on appropriate identification, improvement of tissue 
perfusion (through administration of fluids and vasopressor medications), 
improvement of tissue oxygenation (through administration of oxygen and positive-
pressure ventilation), administration of antibiotics, and early identification of infections 
requiring surgical management. 
❏ Prompt administration of antibiotics is essential and should be based on the 
suspected source of infection. 
 
 
Rosen’s in Perspective 
 
Sepsis is a continual changing field in emergency medicine. The definitions and our 
approach will continue to rapidly develop. 
 
Even though we have the shiny new 9th edition of Rosen’s, even it is 5 years behind (the 
reference the 2012 Surviving sepsis guidelines for example. 
 
So for the sake of your clinical knowledge and exam purposes, we will rely heavily on the 
Giants of FOAM. Specifically, we use the wonderful knowledge that FOAMCAST and 
EMCRIT Project have been pumping out for years. So go straight to those sources for the 
knowledge goodness. 
 
 
 
CrackCast Show Notes – Sepsis Syndromes – December 2017 
www.canadiem.org/crackcast 
 
 
1) Define SIRS, Sepsis, Severe Sepsis, and Septic Shock 
 
Bacteremia – Presence of viable bacteria in the blood, as evidenced by positive blood 
cultures 
 
SIRS – At least two of the following:  
• 
Oral temp >38°C (100.4°F) or <35°C (95°F) 
• 
Respiratory rate >20 breaths/min or PaCO2 < 32 mmHg 
• 
Heart rate >90 beats/min 
• 
Leukocyte count > 12,000/dL or <4000/dL; or >10% bands 
 
Sepsis – SIRS that has a proven or suspected microbial source 
 
Multiple organ dysfunction syndrome (MODS) – Dysfunction of more than one organ, 
requiring intervention homeostasis 
 
From UptoDate:  
 
SIRS and Severe Sepsis (old terms)  
“The use of systemic inflammatory response syndrome (SIRS) criteria to identify those with 
sepsis has fallen out of favor since it is considered by many experts that SIRS criteria are 
present in many hospitalized patients who do not develop infection, and their ability to 
predict death is poor when compared with other scores such as the SOFA score [29,37,38].  
 
SIRS is considered a clinical syndrome that is a form of dysregulated inflammation. It was 
previously defined as two or more abnormalities in temperature, heart rate, respiration, or 
white blood cell count [25]. SIRS may occur in several conditions related, or not, to infection. 
Noninfectious conditions classically associated with SIRS include autoimmune disorders, 
pancreatitis, vasculitis, thromboembolism, burns, or surgery. 
 
The term severe sepsis, which originally referred to sepsis that was associated with tissue 
hypoperfusion (eg, elevated lactate, oliguria) or organ dysfunction (eg, elevated creatinine, 
coagulopathy) [25,33], and the term systemic inflammatory response syndrome (SIRS (table 
1)) are no longer used since the 2016 sepsis and septic shock definitions include patients 
with evidence of tissue hypoperfusion and organ dysfunction.  
 
Sepsis and Septic shock 
a constellation of clinical, laboratory, radiologic, physiologic, and microbiologic data is 
typically required for the diagnosis of sepsis and septic shock. 
 
Big take home point:  
 
A 2016 SCCM/ESICM task force has defined sepsis as life-threatening organ dysfunction 
caused by a dysregulated host response to infection” Uptodate.  
 
So, it’s nice a simple now:  
 
1. You need an infection (suspected or confirmed) 
2. You need organ dysfunction   
 
Then you have sepsis!  
 
 
CrackCast Show Notes – Sepsis Syndromes – December 2017 
www.canadiem.org/crackcast 
 
 
Organ dysfunction = Two or more points on the qSOFA score. ”  
 
 
Source: FOAMCAST 
 
2) Describe Early Goal Directed Therapy 
 
We won’t spend too much time on River’s, although we will give him major props for 
changing how we all care for sepsis patients EGDT! But the current trends have moved 
away from this fluid heavy protocol. 
 
Comes down to the following parameters: 
 
❏ CVP  8-12 mmHg 
❏ MAP 65 – 90 mmHg 
❏ Urine output >0.5 ml/kg/hr 
❏ Mixed venous oxygen saturation 
>65% / ScvO2 >70% 
❏ Haematocrit >30% 
 
 
Source: The original Rivers paper  
 
 
 
 
 
CrackCast Show Notes – Sepsis Syndromes – December 2017 
www.canadiem.org/crackcast 
 
 
3) What is Sepsis 3.0 
 
Check out this FOAMCAST post for the best summary you could ask for 
 
Our understanding of sepsis is changing. 
 
Now its thought of as: 
 
“Sepsis is a clinical syndrome that has physiologic, biological, and biochemical abnormalities 
caused by a dysregulated inflammatory response to infection. Sepsis and the inflammatory 
response that ensues can lead to multiple organ dysfunction syndrome and death.”  
- UptoDate 
 
Sepsis 3.0 with using the above definition, stops depending on SIRS and pickup on qSOFA.  
 
 
Source: FOAMCAST 
 
❏ qSOFA failed to be validated in Chicago patients as published in 2016 (see the 
excellent PULMCRIT post on this)  
 
❏ Follow-up multicentre European trial shows qSOFA outperformed SIRS for picking up 
SEPSIS patients that need ICU level care (see this post for more FOAMCAST) 
CrackCast Show Notes – Sepsis Syndromes – December 2017 
www.canadiem.org/crackcast 
 
 
 
Source: FOAMCAST 
 
4) Discuss the Surviving Sepsis Guidelines 
 
 
Source: FOAMCAST 
CrackCast Show Notes – Sepsis Syndromes – December 2017 
www.canadiem.org/crackcast 
 
 
5) List doses and indications for commonly used vasoactive 
medications 
 
Sepsis 
❏ 1st line Norepinephrine 
❏ 2nd line Vasopressin 
❏ 3rd Line epi if not reaching MAP 
 
Cardiogenic Shock 
 
❏ Epinephrine 
❏ Dobutamine 
❏ Milrinone 
 
Neurogenic shock 
❏ Epinephrine 
❏ Dopamine 
 
Table 130.2 – Dosing of Vasoactive Therapy 
 
Drug 
Dosing 
Dobutamine 
5 – 15 µg/kg/min 
Dopamine 
2 – 20 µg/kg/min 
Epinephrine 
5 – 20 µg/min 
Norepinephrine 
5 – 20 µg/min 
Phenylephrine 
2 – 20 µg/min 
 
6) Describe empiric Abx regimens for typical sources of sepsis 
 
When in doubt, go big! 
 
Piptazo + Vanco 
 
Or Mero + Vanco 
 
See Rosen’s Table 130.3 for suggested initial antibiotic management by source 
 
REMEBER: 
 
Super Bug coverage: 
 
ESBL coverage : FatCAT 
❏ Fosfomycin 
❏ Carbapenems (imipenem vs Meropenem) 
❏ Aminoglycosides (gentamycin / Tobramycin) 
❏ Tigecycline 
 
VRE Coverage 
❏ Linezolid 
❏ Dapto 
❏ Tigecycline 
❏ Chloramphenicol 
❏ high-dose ampicillin or ampicillin/sulbactam 
❏ nitrofurantoin 
CrackCast Show Notes – Sepsis Syndromes – December 2017 
www.canadiem.org/crackcast 
 
 
MRSA Coverage 
PO 
❏ Septra 
❏ Doxy 
❏ Clinda 
❏ Linezolid 
 
IV 
❏ Vanco 
❏ Linezolid 
❏ Daptomycin 
❏ Tigecycline 
 
PSEUDOMONAL COVERAGE 
(puncture wounds, post surgical wounds, Sickle cell anemia) 
 
PO 
❏ Cipro 
 
IV 
❏ Ceftazidime for cefepime 
❏ Tobramycin 
❏ Piptazo 
❏ Meropenem 
 
ANTIPSEUDOMONAL CEPHALOSPORIN = Ceftazidime for cefepime 
ANTIPSEUDOMONAL aminoglycoside = Tobramycin 
 
7) Define ARDS 
 
Acute Respiratory Distress Syndrome 
 
Complex interplay between (1) pulmonary oedema from damage to the alveolocapillary 
barrier; (2) inflammatory infiltrates; (3) surfactant dysfunction 
 
According to LITFL: 
 
ARDS is (The Berlin Definition (2013) 
❏ Acute, with onset over 1 week or less 
❏ Bilateral opacities consistent with pulmonary edema must be present; they may be 
detected on CT or chest radiograph 
❏ PF ratio <300mmHg with a minimum of 5 cmH20 PEEP (PaO2 / FiO2 eg PaO2 80 / 
FiO2 0.80 = 100) 
❏ Must not be fully explained by cardiac failure or fluid overload, in the physician’s best 
estimation using available information — an “objective assessment“ (e.g. 
echocardiogram) should be performed in most cases if there is no clear cause such 
as trauma or sepsis. 
 
CrackCast Show Notes – Sepsis Syndromes – December 2017 
www.canadiem.org/crackcast 
 
 
 
 
Source: Case courtesy of Dr. Craig Hacking, Radiopaedia.org, rID: 53759 
 
ARDS is categorized as being mild, moderate, or severe: 
 
ARDS Severity 
PaO2/FiO2*  
Mortality**  
Mild 
200 – 300 
27% 
Moderate 
100 – 200 
32% 
Severe 
< 100 
45% 
 *on PEEP 5+; **observed in cohort 
  
 
RISK FACTORS 
 
Direct 
❏ pneumonia (46%) 
❏ aspiration of gastric contents (29%) 
❏ lung contusion (34%) 
❏ fat embolism 
❏ near drowning 
❏ inhalational injury 
❏ reperfusion injury 
 
Indirect 
❏ non-pulmonary sepsis (25%) 
❏ multiple trauma (41%) 
❏ massive transfusion (34%) 
❏ pancreatitis (25%) 
❏ cardiopulmonary bypass 
 
 
CrackCast Show Notes – Sepsis Syndromes – December 2017 
www.canadiem.org/crackcast 
 
 
8) Describe the ED approach to managing ARDS 
 
In essence this is a problem for our Colleagues in Critical Care, but we can HELP BIG TIME 
to prevent lung injury in the early hours of mechanical ventilation 
 
See LIFTL 
 
Mechanical Ventilation 
 
❏ ARDS Network protective lung ventilation strategy (from the ARMA study)  
❏ Controlled mode of ventilation 
❏ TV 6mL/kg 
❏ Avoid overstretch (volutrauma) and inadequate recruitment (atelectrauma) 
❏ PEEP 
❏ Plateau pressure <30 cmH20 (higher than this contributes to VILI from overstretching 
and hyperinflation of the functional ‘baby lung’) 
❏ Mode of ventilation: generally no difference 
❏  PCV tends to be used c/o plateau pressure approximates peak pressure, 
with VC plateau pressure needs to be measured 
❏ Oxygenation target: SpO2 > 90%, PaO2 >60mmHg 
❏ Carbon dioxide target: ARDSnet aimed for a normal CO2 -> but lung is exposed to 
repeated tidal stretch, ideally hypercapnia should be minimised but there isn’t 
compelling data to suggest it is harmful unless there is an obvious reason (raised 
ICP, pregnancy). 
 
Other Tx 
❏ Proning 
❏ Sedation to ensure vent synchrony and lower O2 consumption 
❏ <48 hrs of neuromuscular paralysis if PF ratio <150 
❏ Start feeds 
❏ Nitric or Prostacyclins controversial 
❏ VV ECMO 
 
Wisecracks 
 
1) Outline key priorities in diagnostic workup and management of the 
septic patient during the first 6 hours of emergency care.  
 
From UptoDate: “Therapeutic priorities include securing the airway, correcting 
hypoxemia, and establishing vascular access for the early administration of fluids and 
antibiotics. Simultaneously obtaining the following is preferable (within 45 minutes) but 
should not delay the administration of fluids and antibiotics: routine laboratory studies, serum 
lactate, arterial blood gases, blood cultures (aerobic and anaerobic) from two distinct 
venipuncture sites and from indwelling vascular access devices, cultures from easily 
accessible sites (eg, sputum, urine), and imaging of suspected sources.”  
 
1. Rapid identification  
2. MOVIE + Airway 
3. Fluids - RL or NS: 3 L in 3 hours  
4. Empiric Antibiotics  
a. Probably at least two agents 
b. Ideally one given within the first hour of presentation  
c. Thorough HEAD TO TOE; GUMS TO BUMS; FOLD TO FOREIGN BODY 
assessment to help guide your empiric therapy  
CrackCast Show Notes – Sepsis Syndromes – December 2017 
www.canadiem.org/crackcast 
 
 
5. Investigations  
a. Assessment of end-organ function  
b. Cultures  
c. Imaging  
6. Reassessment + consideration of inopressors  
a. MAP > 65-70  
b. U/O minimum 0.5 ml/kg/hr 
7. Source control - ideally within 12 hours  
8. Roll into AT’s tender care → the ICU  
 
General Guidelines to aim for in the resuscitative phase are:  
 
● MAP > 65 mmHg 
● HR < 100/min 
● Adequate tissue perfusion as assessed by clinical examination 
● CI > 2.2 l/min/m2 
● CVP < 8 mmHg 
 
2) What is HLH? 
 
See LITFL and PULMCRIT 
 
According to Dr. Josh Farkas: 
 
“What is hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (HLH)? (a.k.a., hemophagocytic syndrome, 
macrophage activation syndrome) HLH is a clinical syndrome resulting from immunological 
hyperactivation centered around macrophages.  It involves a proinflammatory cytokine storm 
with high levels of many cytokines (e.g., IL-1, IL-6, and IL-8).  The histological signature of 
this process is activated macrophages phagocytizing other cells.” 
 
Now thought to be a Sepsis and HLH overlap syndrome, or “SHLHOS” 
 
Clinically =  
 
❏ Fever 
❏ Shock 
❏ capillary leak 
❏ Thrombocytopenia 
❏ Delirium 
❏ disseminated intravascular coagulation 
❏ multiorgan failure 
 
Need AT LEAST 5 of following: 
 
❏ Fever 
❏ Splenomegaly 
❏ Cytopenia in at least two cell lines 
❏ Hemoglobin < 9 mg/dL (Hb <90 g/L) 
❏ Platelets < 100 billion/L (platelets <100 x 10E9/L) 
❏ Neutrophils < 1,000 / microliter (neutrophils <1 x 10E3/L) 
❏ Hypertriglyceridemia and/or hypofibrinogenemia 
❏ Triglycerides >265 mg/dL 
❏ Fibrinogen < 150 mg/dL 
CrackCast Show Notes – Sepsis Syndromes – December 2017 
www.canadiem.org/crackcast 
 
 
❏ Hemophagocytosis in bone marrow, spleen, or lymph node biopsy 
❏ Ferritin >500 ng/ml (>10,000 highly specific, > 50,000 high chance of mortality) 
❏ Low natural killer-cell activity 
❏ Soluble CD25 (i.e. soluble IL-2 receptor) > 2,400 U/ml 
 
Basically super hard to diagnose, but likely very common in those sepsis patients that die in 
ICU. 
 
Possible roles of interleukin-1 receptor antagonists (anakinra) and STEROIDS 
 
 
 
 
 
