# Metadata
- topic: 3.1 - Head and Neck Disorders - CrackCast-Shownotes-Episode-71-Ophthalmology-Part-B
- source_folder: 3.1 - Head and Neck Disorders
- original_file: CrackCast-Shownotes-Episode-71-Ophthalmology-Part-B.pdf

CrackCast Show Notes – Ophthalmology Part B – April 2017 
www.canadiem.org/crackcast 
 
 
Chapter 71 – Ophthalmology Part B 
 
Episode Overview: 
 
1. List 10 causes of ↓ vision post blunt eye trauma 
2. What historical features are concerning for intra-ocular foreign body? 
3. List 4 options for treatment of corneal abrasions 
4. Describe the management of traumatic hyphema 
5. What causes the finding of a ‘second pupil’ post-trauma? 
6. Describe the physical findings of globe rupture and describe management 
7. List 5 indications for ophtho consultation for eyelid lacerations 
8. Describe diagnosis and treatment for orbital floor fractures:  
a. List 2 findings on X-ray of orbital floor fracture 
b. List indications for surgical repair of orbital floor fracture 
9. Describe the clinical findings of retrobulbar hemorrhage and the steps in performing 
lateral canthotomy 
10. List 3 complications of ocular trauma 
 
Rosen's in Perspective 
 
● If you haven’t listened to Episode 21 and 22, check them out!  
○ If you want to review how to do an eye exam... 
 
1) List 10 causes of ↓ vision post blunt eye trauma 
 
1) Globe rupture 
2) Hyphema 
3) Lens subluxation / dislocation 
4) Iridodialysis  
5) Traumatic uveitis  
6) Vitreous hemorrhage 
7) Retinal injury 
a. Hemorrhage, detachment, tear, “commotio retinae” (Berlin’s edema) 
8) Orbital wall fracture 
9) Retrobulbar hematoma 
10) Optic nerve injury 
a. Causing avulsion, transection, compression, contusion of the optic nerve  
 
Lens subluxation and dislocation 
 
● May occur in minor trauma in patients with: 
○ Marfan syndrome, homocystinuria, tertiary syphilis, connective tissue disease  
● Symptoms: 
○ Monocular diplopia / visual distortion / blurry vision /  
● Signs: 
○ Dec. VA / subluxed lens after dilation / shimmering of the iris 
● Treatment: Optho consult 
CrackCast Show Notes – Ophthalmology Part B – April 2017 
www.canadiem.org/crackcast 
 
 
2) What historical features are concerning for intra-ocular foreign body? 
 
Orbital and Intraocular foreign bodies 
 
● Need clinical suspicion 
○ Hammering, grinding, metalworking, machine operating 
○ Explosions, firearm use 
● Need CT diagnosis 
● Treatment: 
○ Based on optho opinion; 
■ Inert bodies (plastic, glass, metals) may be left in  
■ Organic and oxidizing material needs removal 
■ Need eye shielding 
■ Need IV ceftazidime 
■ Need topical erythromycin 
 
3) List 4 options for treatment of corneal abrasions 
 
Mechanical Corneal Abrasions 
 
● FB sensation, photophobia, decreased VA 
● Pain relief with topical anesthetics diagnose the problem as corneal injury 
● Watch for a positive Seidel's sign - which suggests a corneal perforation 
● Treatment  
○ Full lid eversion and examination! 
○ Contact lenses shouldn’t be worn until the abrasion is healed (3-5 days) 
○ Eye patches aren’t needed! 
○ Cycloplegic prn 
■ e.g. Tropicamide 
○ Topical antibiotics - probably only needed for people who wear contact lenses 
■ Pseudomonal coverage if contact lens wearer (tobramycin 0.5% 1-2 
drops q 4hrs) 
○ Topical analgesics: 
■ Ketorolac 0.5% QID 
■ Diclofenac 0.1% QID 
○ Tetanus immunization only needed for any “tetanus-prone” injury with dirt and 
organic matter 
■ NO cases of tetanus have been documented from simple corneal 
abrasions 
● Symptoms should resolve by 24-72 hrs 
 
Corneal foreign bodies: 
 
● High risk features for perforation 
○ Grinding, drilling, saws, hammering --> consider CT orbits 
● Treatment 
○ full eye exam  
CrackCast Show Notes – Ophthalmology Part B – April 2017 
www.canadiem.org/crackcast 
 
 
○ Topical anesthetic 
○ Remove: 
■ Irrigation, moistened cotton tip applicator 
■ 18 ga BLUNT needle 
○ Rust ring: 
■ Needs 24 hrs to prime and move to the surface of the cornea 
● Referral 
○ Deeply embedded, in the visual axis 
 
Conjunctival foreign body 
 
● Same approach as corneal but less risk of affecting vision 
● Use topical phenylephrine to help reduce the bleeding on removal 
 
Subconjunctival hemorrhage 
 
● Common occurrence with valsalva or spontaneously 
● Should be PAINLESS, not affecting vision, with no photophobia 
● Should not tract into the limbus 
● If bilateral:  
○ Think about bleeding diathesis 
● Treatment: cold compresses x 24 hrs  
● Resolves in 2-4 weeks 
 
4) Describe the management of traumatic hyphema 
 
Traumatic hyphema 
 
● Due to injury to the blood vessels in the iris or ciliary body 
● Amount varies from miniscule (all what can be seen by slit lamp -- > full "8 ball") 
● Symptoms: 
○ Pain  / photophobia / dec. VA / mildly elevated IOP 
● Management: 
○ Need admission if: 
■ >50%, decreased VA, increased IOP, sickle cell disease 
● e.g. “really big, really bad, gonna pop, or patient factors” 
■ Treatment (if no sickle cell disease) 
● Topical beta blocker 
● Topical alpha-agonist / carbonic anhydrase inhibitor 
● Acetazolamide or IV mannitol 
● +/- Cycloplegics and steroids 
○ At risk for: 
■ Rebleeding in 2-5 days 
■ Corneal blood staining 
■ Glaucoma (due to angle recession)  
■ Synechia formation 
○ Those with hemoglobinopathies: 
CrackCast Show Notes – Ophthalmology Part B – April 2017 
www.canadiem.org/crackcast 
 
 
■ Sickle cell disease / trait ; thalassemia are at increased risk for 
complications 
● AT high risk for INCREASED IOP 
● Need coordinated intensive treatment with opthalmology  
 
Traumatic iridocyclitis (uveitis) 
 
● Caused by blunt injury to the globe --- >  ciliary spasm 
● Symptoms: 
○ Photophobia / deep aching pain 
● Signs 
○ Perilimbal conjunctival injection (ciliary flush) 
○ Cells in the ant. chamber 
○ Flare (protein content) 
○ Non-dilating pupil.  
○ Direct and consensual photophobia 
● Treatment: 
○ Long acting cycloplegic (homatropine) 
○ Prednisolone 
 
Traumatic mydriasis and miosis 
 
● Need to rule out altered LOC or cranial nerve defect before a pupillary defect is 
diagnosed 
● Results from small tears in the pupillary muscle 
 
5) What causes the finding of a ‘second pupil’ post-trauma? 
 
Iridodialysis 
 
● Tearing of the iris root from the anterior ciliary body --> leads to second pupil 
● Usually occurring after blunt trauma 
 
 
 
● Watch for hyphema 
● Symptoms: monocular diplopia  
● Needs immediate optho. consult; 
○ Bed rest 
○ Keep intraocular pressure low 
○ Eye shielding  
 
 
 
CrackCast Show Notes – Ophthalmology Part B – April 2017 
www.canadiem.org/crackcast 
 
 
6) Describe the physical findings of globe rupture and describe 
management 
 
Scleral globe rupture 
 
● Occurs in setting of blunt or penetrating trauma 
● May be obvious (contents oozing) or subtle 
● Symptoms: 
○ Dec. VA / pain 
● Signs: 
○ Bloody chemosis / severe subconjunctival hemorrhage /   
○ Tear drop pupil 
○ RAPD / poor VA / no red light reflex 
○ Do NOT do tonometry  
● CT: 
○ Only 75% sens.  
● Treatment: 
○ Eye shield 
○ Head of bed > 45 degrees 
○ NPO 
○ Antiemetics  
○ Analgesics 
○ Antitussives  
○ Broad spectrum abx: 
■ Ceftriaxone & gentamicin & vancomycin  
 
7) List 5 indications for ophtho consultation for eyelid lacerations 
 
Laceration of the eyelids 
 
● Need to search for a penetrating injury and foreign body 
● Simple superficial lacerations not involving the eyelid margin can be treated in 
emerg.  
○ Simple 6-0 / 7-0 interrupted sutures removed in 3-5 days 
● Complex lacerations needing referral: 
○ Lac of the lid margin 
○ Lac. of the canalicular system (medial eyelid) 
○ Lac. involving the levator or canthal tendons 
○ Lac. through orbital septum 
■ Presence of orbital fat*** = no subcutaneous fat in the eyelids 
so the fat is likely from a globe injury 
○ Lac. with tissue loss 
 
Conjunctival / corneal / scleral lacerations 
 
● Small superficial conjunctival lacerations  = no suturing, heal well,  
○ Topical antibiotics 
CrackCast Show Notes – Ophthalmology Part B – April 2017 
www.canadiem.org/crackcast 
 
 
○ Larger (> 1cm) 
■ Need repair 
● Corneal/scleral lacerations  
○ Full thickness if: 
■ Loss of anterior chamber depth, teardrop-shaped pupil, blood 
in anterior chamber, seidels signs 
○ Treated: 
■ As globe rupture with optho. consult 
 
8) Describe diagnosis and treatment for orbital floor fractures 
 
Orbital wall fractures 
 
● The orbital floor is the weakest point = it’s the emergency pressure release to prevent 
globe injury 
○ Fracture can lead to entrapment of inferior rectus/oblique muscle; orbital fat or 
connective tissue 
○ Signs: 
■ Enophthalmos, ptosis, diplopia, anesthesia of cheek and upper lip, 
limitation of upward gaze 
○ Diagnosis: CT orbits is the preferred test 
○ Treatment: 
■ If fracture into an infected sinus: 
● Decongestants +/- steroids 
● Clavulin 
● Ice packs 
● Medial orbital wall (enter the ethmoid sinus) 
○ Signs 
■ Orbital emphysema and epistaxis  
■ Diplopia 
● Key instructions: 
○ Don't blow your nose or sneeze 
○ Watch for signs of infection 
○ Watch for double vision or visual loss 
○ Can be discharged home if: 
■ No globe rupture 
■ No visual impairment  
 
a) List 2 findings on X-ray of orbital floor fracture 
 
● Plain x-ray films have limited utility: 
○ On x-ray film, the teardrop sign, a bulge extending from the orbit into the 
maxillary sinus,  
○ An air-fluid level in the maxillary sinus are indirect signs of orbital floor injury 
 
 
 
CrackCast Show Notes – Ophthalmology Part B – April 2017 
www.canadiem.org/crackcast 
 
 
b) List indications for surgical repair of orbital floor fracture 
 
■ Surgery for: 
● Persistent diplopia +/- loss of visual acuity 
● Cosmetic concerns that persist after 7-10 days when swelling 
has subsided 
○ Don't need "in ER" consultation, can be seen in f/u in 1-
2 weeks 
● Consider admission and quicker consultation if the fracture 
extends through an infected sinus 
 
 
9) Describe the clinical findings of retrobulbar hemorrhage and the steps 
in performing lateral canthotomy 
 
Retrobulbar hemorrhage 
 
● Causes acute rise in IOP which can compress the optic nerve 
○ Compression of the Central retinal artery and optic nerve 
● Signs 
○ Proptosis 
○ Limited EOM 
○ Visual loss 
○ Increased IOP 
● ***Don't wait for a CT scan if you 
are suspicious***** 
● Treatment: 
○ Carbonic anhydrase 
inhibitor 
○ Topical beta blockers 
○ Mannitol 1-2 g/kg 
○ LATERAL CANTHOTOMY 
 
 
 
CrackCast Show Notes – Ophthalmology Part B – April 2017 
www.canadiem.org/crackcast 
 
 
The procedure: 
1. Ensure the patient has one of the absolute 
/ relative indications for this procedure 
a. DIP A CONE 
2. Informed consent 
3. Don PPE 
4. Wash the area with saline 
5. 1-3 ml 1% lidocaine with epi. Into the 
lateral canthus (consider light procedural 
sedation) 
6. Devascularize with hemostat 
7. Incise the lateral canthus  
8. Pull lower lid down and localize the 
inferior canthal tendon - then cut it with iris 
scissors 
9. Reassess, and repeat for the superior 
canthal tendon if needed 
 
Table copied from: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/17637149 
 
See:  
https://first10em.com/2015/04/01/procedure-lateral-canthotomy/ 
And 
http://webeye.ophth.uiowa.edu/eyeforum/tutorials/lateral-canthotomy-cantholysis.htm 
 
For videos explaining it!  
 
10) List 3 complications of ocular trauma 
 
● Post-traumatic corneal ulcers: 
○ Can develop post-trauma due to bacterial or fungal infection 
○ Signs: white/gray cornea 
■ Hypopyon 
○ Treatment: 
■ Ophtho referral 
■ Cycloplegic 
■ Topical antibiotics 
 
● Endophthalmitis 
○ Infection of the DEEP structures of the eye 
■ Anterior, posterior, vitreous chambers of the eye 
○ Symptoms: 
■ PAIN, and vision loss 
○ Signs: 
■ Decreased VA, chemosis, hyperemia, hazy chambers 
 
 
CrackCast Show Notes – Ophthalmology Part B – April 2017 
www.canadiem.org/crackcast 
 
 
○ Risk factors: 
■ Blunt globe rupture, penetrating eye injury, foreign bodies, 
ocular surgery 
○ Treatment: 
 
■ IV ceftazidime, IV vancomycin 
■ intraocular gentamicin + clindamycin 
 
● Sympathetic ophthalmia 
○ Famous disease: thought to have affected Louis Braille who was blind 
by age 5! 
■ http://eyewiki.aao.org/Sympathetic_Ophthalmia 
○ Inflammation that occurs in the UNINJURED EYE weeks to months 
after opposite eye injury 
○ An autoimmune response to the normal uveal tissues 
○ Symptoms: 
■ Pain, photophobia, dec. VA 
○ Treatment: 
■ Steroids, immunosuppressive agents 
