# Metadata
- topic: 4.1 - Environment - CrackCast-Shownotes-Episode-145-Drowning
- source_folder: 4.1 - Environment
- original_file: CrackCast-Shownotes-Episode-145-Drowning.pdf

CrackCast Show Notes – Drowning – January 2018 
www.canadiem.org/crackcast 
 
 
Chapter 145 – Drowning 
 
Episode Overview: 
 
1) List risk factors for drowning 
2) List 5 variables that portend poor outcome 
3) Describe the diving reflex 
4) Describe the management of a drowning patient with respiratory distress 
5) Discuss the indications for rewarming the drowning patient.  To what temperature do 
we warm to? 
6) What are late complications of drowning?  
 
Wisecracks 
 
1. What is immersion syndrome?  
 
Key Points: 
 
▪ 
Drowning is a leading cause of death and loss of years of life with over 90% of cases 
occurring in lower- and middle-income countries. 
 
▪ 
All significant drownings induce pulmonary injury and hypoxia by the amount of 
water aspirated and the duration of submersion. 
 
▪ 
Pulmonary and neurologic support is essential to optimize the victim’s chance of a 
favorable outcome from this hypoxic event. 
 
▪ 
Electroencephalography may be indicated in obtunded drowning victims to assess for 
subclinical seizures. 
 
▪ 
No prognostic scale or clinical presentation accurately predicts long-term 
neurologic outcome; normal neurologic recovery is documented in patients 
with prolonged submersions, persistent coma, cardiovascular instability, and 
fixed and dilated pupils. 
 
▪ 
Hyperventilation, steroids, dehydration, barbiturate coma, and neuromuscular 
blockade do not improve outcome after resuscitation. 
 
▪ 
Comatose patients who have been resuscitated after reasonable submersion time 
regardless of rhythm should not be rewarmed above 34°C. 
 
 
Rosen’s in Perspective 
 
Traditionally, the terminology describing drowning injuries has been confusing and 
impractical.  
 
● There are other terms historically thrown around which may still be lingering:  
○ Drowning 
○ Secondary drowning 
○ Wet Non-fatal drowning 
○ Near-drowning  
CrackCast Show Notes – Drowning – January 2018 
www.canadiem.org/crackcast 
 
 
○ Dry Drowning – A period of asphyxia due to laryngospasm   
○ Salt water drowning 
○ Fresh water drowning 
 
In the past, drowning referred to death within 24 hours of suffocation from submersion in a 
liquid, whereas near-drowning described victims who survived at least 24 hours past the 
initial event regardless of the outcome.  
 
Thankfully, in 2005 the World Health Organization (WHO) published a new policy defining 
drowning to clarify documentation and to better track drowning injuries worldwide. Drowning 
was defined as “the process of experiencing respiratory impairment from 
submersion/immersion in liquid.”  
 
Since that time, working groups have developed Utstein definitions to promote consistent 
international reporting and research.  
 
Furthermore, the WHO policy states, “Drowning outcomes should be classified as: death, 
morbidity, and no morbidity; the terms wet, dry, active, passive, silent, and secondary 
drowning should no longer be used.” The term near-drowning should not be used, and the 
association of the term drowning with a fatal outcome should be abandoned. 
 
According to the Utstein guidelines, drowning refers to: "A process resulting in primary 
respiratory impairment from submersion or immersion in a liquid medium"  
 
Apparently 40 people die per hour from drowning - most are children less than 5 years old.  
 
1) List risk factors for drowning 
 
Risk factors:  
 
● Toddlers 
● Elderly (>75) (hurricane katrina deaths)  
● Boys 
● American Indian and Alaska Native 
● Seizure d/o 
● Autism or developmental disorders  
● Prolonged QT syndrome (immersion syndrome) or other cardiac mutations  
● Hypothermia  
● Hyperventilation before a shallow dive 
● Concomitant trauma, stroke, or myocardial infarction 
● No adult supervision  
● Risk taking behaviour  
● Summer months, on weekends, water sports 
● ETOH intake or drug intake  
● Inexperienced swimmers and very experience swimmers 
 
2) List 5 variables that portend poor outcome 
 
List from Rosen’s 
 
● Age 
○ Very young LESS than 3 YEARS OLD (increased risk for hypothermia and 
more metabolic demands) 
○ Very old (comorbidities)  
CrackCast Show Notes – Drowning – January 2018 
www.canadiem.org/crackcast 
 
 
● Water temperature  
○ Cold-water immersion speeds the development of exhaustion, altered 
consciousness, and cardiac dysrhythmia. 
● Duration and degree of hypothermia  
● Lack of diving reflex 
● Ineffective response to resuscitation efforts  
● Drug and alcohol use (cited in PMID 24607870 
 
The list from Uptodate and Rosen’s:  
 
• 
Duration of submersion >5 minutes (most critical factor) 
• 
Time to effective basic life support >10 minutes 
• 
Resuscitation duration >25 minutes 
• 
Age >14 years 
• 
Glasgow coma scale <5 (ie, comatose) 
• 
Persistent apnea and requirement of cardiopulmonary resuscitation in the emergency 
department 
• 
Arterial blood pH <7.1 upon presentation 
Break it down into:  
● Event factors (duration, time to BLS)  
● Patient factors (age (older), drug and etoh use, comorbidities)  
● Clinical factors (hypothermia, long resuscitation duration, low GCS, ongoing 
cardio/pulmonary arrest (especially asystole), low pH, unreactive pupils) 
 
Neurologically intact survival is reported for individual patients even with several of these 
factors present; none of several proposed scoring systems using combinations of these 
variables has 100% predictive power. Children who present with an abnormal head 
computed tomography (CT) scan (eg, intracranial bleed, cerebral edema) within the first 24 
hours have a nearly 100% mortality rate. Furthermore, an abnormal head CT scan at any 
time is associated with poor outcome (death or persistent vegetative state). 
Adverse neurologic findings on initial presentation do not preclude full neurologic 
recovery, although in general, patients whose duration of submersion or resuscitation 
exceeds 10 minutes have an unfavorable outcome. 
Unfortunately, in reality we never really know these details accurately when that 
resuscitation rolls through the doors... 
 
 
CrackCast Show Notes – Drowning – January 2018 
www.canadiem.org/crackcast 
 
 
3) Describe the diving reflex 
 
The diving reflex may also play a protective role in infant and child submersions. Activation 
of the diving reflex by fear or immersion of the face in cold water shunts blood centrally to 
the heart and brain. Apnea and bradycardia ensue, prolonging the duration of submersion 
tolerated without central nervous system (CNS) damage. The proposed protective effect of 
cold water immersion was unfortunately not seen in a study of 1094 drowning victims of all 
ages, where water temperature had no correlation. 
 
4) Describe the management of a drowning patient with respiratory 
distress 
 
...if you’re on scene proceed with wilderness medicine principles* then initiate basic 
life support (get out of the water, start CPR when on a solid surface, only immobilize C-
spines if: fall from a height, diving into shallow water, signs of trauma, motorized vehicle 
collision)  
 
● Note that the priorities of CPR in the drowning victim differ from those in the 
typical adult cardiac arrest patient, which emphasize immediate uninterrupted 
chest compressions. If the patient does not respond to the delivery of two 
rescue breaths that make the chest rise, the rescuer should immediately begin 
performing high-quality chest compressions. CPR, including the application of an 
automated external defibrillator, is then performed according to standard guidelines. - 
Uptodate  
 
● Check for that pulse in hypothermic patients for at least 1 minute!  
 
Assuming you’re in the hospital:  
 
1. If you have time - brief your team on what you know 
a. Expected injuries 
b. Expected management priorities 
c. What to do if the patient deteriorates  
 
2. MOVIE! 
a. Goal Sp02 > 94% 
 
3. ABC vs. H+P patient 
a. Resuscitate → consider whether this is a medical or a trauma resus!  
i. 
Circulation 
1. Start CPR!  
2. Core temp 
a. Rewarming only up to 34°C followed by a 24-hour mild 
hypothermic treatment before normothermia is reached 
may be advantageous because of decreased 
pulmonary reperfusion injury and reduced secondary 
brain injury. Emerging resuscitation literature indicates 
an emerging role for therapeutic hypothermia in 
drowning victims. 
ii. 
Airway 
1. Know that a lot of water can be swallowed, so consider 
decompressing with an NG prior to excessive bagging!  
CrackCast Show Notes – Drowning – January 2018 
www.canadiem.org/crackcast 
 
 
a. Aspiration of gastric contents greatly compounds the 
degree of pulmonary injury and increases the risk of 
ARDS 
iii. 
Breathing 
1. Look for signs of pulmonary injury - hypoxia, cyanosis, resp. 
Distress  
a. Rhonchi, wheezes, rales → things may be getting 
worse!  
iv. 
Disability 
1. Cerebral focused resuscitation  
a. Avoid the killers!  
2. Injury of the cervical spine is not common in patients with 
submersion injuries, but precautions should be taken if there is 
a concerning history (eg, dive into shallow water) or signs of 
injury. 
 
b. If you have time: 
  
i. 
Get a full SAMPLE history and event details 
ii. 
Assess 
Consider what precipitated this drowning:  
a. drug or ethanol intoxication, cardiac arrest, 
hypoglycemia, seizure, and attempted suicide or 
homicide, NAT, C-spine injuries 
iii. 
Workup 
iv. 
Admit or treat and street!   
1. Asymptomatic patients should probably be observed for 6-8 
hours to watch for delayed pulmonary injury (follow vital signs, 
follow clinical exam and consider repeat CXR prior to d/c)  
 
 
Note what is NOT above (i.e. no evidence for it!) 
 
● Steroids 
● Diuresis 
● Empirical antibiotics (unless in grossly contaminated water or signs of infection)  
 
Additional workup:  
 
● ABG 
● Labs with renal function 
● ECG (QTC!) 
● CXR (with repeat testing in a few hours if signs of pulmonary involvement on exam or 
vital signs) 
● Consider getting that CT head (and maybe Cspine) if the patient is stable to look for 
any pre-existing bleed, trauma, or cerebral edema (this may help our ICU colleagues 
prognosticate in 24 hrs) 
 
Victims with CNS injury may present with symptoms ranging from mild lethargy to coma with 
fixed and dilated pupils. CNS injury results from the initial hypoxic or ischemic insult and 
from the cascade of reperfusion injury that follows reestablishment of cerebral blood flow 
after an arrest. The release of inflammatory mediators and the generation of oxygen free 
radicals in the post resuscitation period contribute to cytotoxic cerebral edema, compromise 
of the blood-brain barrier, and increased intracranial pressure. 
 
CrackCast Show Notes – Drowning – January 2018 
www.canadiem.org/crackcast 
 
 
Cardiac dysrhythmias may incite drowning or develop as its consequence. Hypoxemia, 
acidosis, and, potentially, hypothermia are the primary factors responsible for dysrhythmias 
ranging from ventricular tachycardia and fibrillation to bradycardia asystole.  
 
Electrolyte disturbances are rarely significant enough to be dysrhythmogenic. 
 
Other clinical sequelae of drowning may include acute renal impairment, which is present on 
admission in approximately 50% of patients as the result of lactic acidosis; prolonged  
hypoperfusion; and, in some instances, rhabdomyolysis. Coagulopathy as a consequence of 
associated hypothermia or disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC) may also occur. 
 
 
From: https://movewild.wordpress.com/2017/02/01/basic-wilderness-med-concepts/ 
 
5) Discuss the indications for rewarming the drowning patient.  To what 
temperature do we warm to? 
 
No consensus exists with regard to the appropriate length of resuscitative effort for 
hypothermic drowning victims in the ED. 
 
The safest parameter is to continue until the core temperature reaches at least 32°C to 
35°C, because cerebral death cannot be diagnosed accurately in hypothermic patients with 
temperatures below this level. This parameter may not always be practical, 
however, because brain-dead patients are often poikilothermic. 
 
 
 
CrackCast Show Notes – Drowning – January 2018 
www.canadiem.org/crackcast 
 
 
6) What are late complications of drowning?  
 
● Secondary neurologic injury - ischemia, cerebral edema, seizures 
● Hypovolemia - due to cold diuresis  
● Rhabdomyolysis 
● Renal impairment 
● Aspiration pneumonitis  
● Respiratory infection  
● Hypoxic cardiomyopathy   
● PTSD 
 
Wisecracks 
 
1) What is immersion syndrome?  
 
Immersion syndrome refers specifically to syncope resulting from cardiac dysrhythmias on 
sudden contact with water that is at least 5°C lower than body temperature. The risk is 
proportional to the difference between body temperature and water temperature.  
 
Wetting of the face and head before entrance into the water may prevent the inciting 
sequence of events. Mechanisms for the syndrome are vagal stimulation leading to 
asystole and ventricular fibrillation secondary to QT prolongation after a massive release of 
catecholamines on contact with cold water. The resultant loss of consciousness leads to 
secondary drowning. 
 
Undetected primary cardiac arrhythmia (may be a more common cause of drowning than 
generally appreciated). As an example, cold water immersion and exercise can cause fatal 
arrhythmias in patients with the congenital long QT syndrome type 1. Similarly, mutations in 
the cardiac ryanodine receptor (RyR)-2 gene, which is associated with familial polymorphic 
VT in the absence of structural heart disease or QT prolongation, have been identified in 
some individuals with unexplained drowning. - Uptodate  
 
 
