# Metadata
- topic: 2.4 - Soft Tissue Injuries - CrackCast-Shownotes-Episode-60-Foreign-Bodies-Jan2017
- source_folder: 2.4 - Soft Tissue Injuries
- original_file: CrackCast-Shownotes-Episode-60-Foreign-Bodies-Jan2017.pdf

CrackCast Show Notes – Foreign Bodies – January 2017 
www.canadiem.org/crackcast 
 
 
Chapter 60 – Foreign Bodies  
 
Episode Overview: 
 
1. Describe your approach to Ocular FB 
2. What is Seidel Sign? 
3. List indirect signs of FB on Xray 
4. List complications of ear FB 
5. Describe the process of anesthesia of the ear and preparation for FB removal 
6. Describe 5 techniques for removal of FB from ear 
7. Describe the management of TM perforation secondary to FB 
8. Describe 5 techniques for removal of FB from nose 
9. Describe a step-wise approach to pediatric FB airway obstruction 
10. List 7 symptoms of esophageal FB 
11. List 8 complications of esophageal FB 
12. List 4 complications specific to button battery ingestions 
13. List indications for removal of esophageal FBs 
14. List 4 removal techniques of esophageal FB 
15.  List 5 techniques for management of food bolus and their mechanism of action 
16. List the criteria for continued expectant management for intestinal FB 
17. Describe the stepwise management of a rectal FB 
 
Wisecracks:  
 
1. What is the safe dose of topical anesthetics? 
2. How do you test the radiolucency of an object? 
3. What is a Cafe Coronary? What is Penetration Syndrome? 
4. Differentiate Body stuffing from Body Packing 
 
Rosen's in Perspective 
 
Tricky problem. Sometimes glaringly obvious: the arrow in the head, the electronic vibrating 
device in the rectum. However, sometimes we are unable to obtain an accurate history; BB 
in the eye, or 100 plus packets of cocaine in the GI tract of an inconspicuous patient. 
 
THINK HIGH RISK GROUPS: 
 
N 
neurologically impaired patients 
E 
edentulous individuals 
P 
patients with certain psychiatric diagnoses 
I 
incarcerated individuals 
D 
diapered (individuals at the extremes of age) 
 
Imaging Helps: Plain radiographs help with radio-opaque objects. Order two views as always so as to 
locate in 2 dimensions (you can’t find a house without the full address) 
 
Don’t forget about CT and Ultrasound: Good for organic FBs and structures that are difficult to image 
(eg. the EYE) 
CrackCast Show Notes – Foreign Bodies – January 2017 
www.canadiem.org/crackcast 
 
 
 
Caution - U/S has poor sensitivity for foreign bodies.  CT saves your bacon here. 
 
This should go without saying… but… if there is a chance of metal FB anywhere… don’t order an 
MRI... 
 
Speaking of metal… life hack: Hand held metal detector - if history of metal FB, start sweeping! 
 
1) Describe your approach to ocular FB 
 
History / Exam 
 
If possible ocular penetration - examine for globe rupture (Seidel sign) 
 
Don’t forget about imaging Xray or CT, avoid U/S and any pressure to eye if positive 
 
As always with eye, don’t forget about anterior chamber (hyphema/hypopyon) and full exam 
(EOM, Visual acuity, Visual Fields, Pupils, pressure if no globe injury) 
 
 
Stop, do not pass go if you see: 
A) Obvious perforation with teardrop pupil,  
B) Vitreous extrusion, or  
C) Protruding intra-ocular foreign body  
 
 
 
 
Pearls: 
 
Don’t forget to take out the contacts (remove them or they will be stained!) 
Don’t forget to ask about LASIK/PRK (corneal flap may be present for >6 years, avoid all 
corneal procedures, ie. rust ring removal and FB removal in these patients) 
 
Checkout: 
http://foamcast.org/2016/06/09/episode-51-ocular-trauma/ 
http://foamcast.org/2016/10/10/episode-58-ophthalmology/ 
https://emin5.com/2016/02/07/slit-lamp-anatomy/ 
 
Step 1: Anesthetize the eye: topical anesthesia (alcaine vs. tetracaine in our shop) 
Step 2: Position patient: Comfort for you and them 
Step 3: Slit lamp key for both exam and removal (use fluor as needed) 
Step 4: Pick your weapon of choice: 
Cotton swab - Small gauge needle - Forceps - Hook - Burr 
 
Not working? Consult optho. Don’t go all cowboy and perforate the anterior chamber! 
 
Need follow-up post FB removal, antibiotic drops / ointment with corneal involvement and 
TETANUS PRN and watch for rust rings with oxidising metals 
 
 
 
CrackCast Show Notes – Foreign Bodies – January 2017 
www.canadiem.org/crackcast 
 
 
2) What is Seidel’s Sign? 
 
Vitreal extrusion or positive fluorescein flowing with aqueous humor  
 
As Rosen’s puts it: “Identification of rivulets of fluorescein tracking from the puncture (i.e., 
positive Seidel test result)” = GLOBE RUPTURE 
 
3) List indirect signs of FB on Xray 
 
Eye: Free air 
 
Ears: Erosion / infection of the mastoids 
 
Nose: Chronic erosive synovitis 
 
Neck: Prevertebral swelling or soft tissue emphysema 
 
Lungs:   
- Pulmonary Gas trapping (flat & fixed diaphragm on inspiration vs. expiration, shift of 
mediastinum away from affected side during expiration) 
- Narrowing of subglottic space 
- Atelectasis 
- Bronchiectasis and bronchial stenosis (late) 
 
4) List complications of ear FB 
 
- Damage to Ear canal 
- Otitis Externa 
- TM Perforation 
- Expansion of vegetable / porous material with irrigation 
 
Critical Complications: 
- Eustachian tube dysfunction 
- Para-pharyngeal abscess 
- Mastoiditis with progression to fatal brain abscess and meningitis. 
 
5) Describe the process of anesthesia of the ear and preparation for FB 
removal 
 
Topical anesthetic: 1-5 ml for installation in the auditory canal, 1-2% lidocaine w/o epi 
 
Consider procedural sedation dependent on patient factors (age, compliance, etc.) 
 
Step 1: Position patient and use proper lighting (headlamp, otoscope, operative microscope) 
Step 2: Speculum for proper visualisation (otic or nares speculum, not the gyny size) 
Step 3: Inspect and document presence of TM rupture BEFORE FB removal 
CrackCast Show Notes – Foreign Bodies – January 2017 
www.canadiem.org/crackcast 
 
 
Step 4: Instil lidocaine for topical anesthesia, consider 10% solution spray if insect present in 
canal (microscope immersion oil may be more efficacious) 
 
6) Describe 5 techniques for removal of FB from the ear 
 
 
 
- Right-angle probe 
- Ballooned catheter (Swanz is my favorite)  
- Suction catheter (small)  
- Alligator forceps / bayonet  forceps 
- Irrigation 
 
7) Describe the management of TM perforation secondary to FB 
 
Step A) Placement of topical antibiotic with placement of Wick in external auditory canal for 
prevention of otitis externa (e.g. Ciprofloxacin Suspension) 
Step B) Oral antibiotics for prevention of middle ear infection (e.g. Amox-Clav) 
Step C) Follow-up assessment by ENT in 2-3 days 
Step D) Urgent ENT consult for: Significant hearing loss (≥40 dB), vertigo, nystagmus, 
ataxia, or facial nerve injury) 
 
8) Describe 7 techniques for removal of FB from nose 
 
1) “Mother’s Kiss” - Positive pressure applied to mouth with unaffected nare compressed 
2) Patient variant insufflation: Patient directed to take a deep breath and patient or parent 
compressed unaffected nare 
3) Blunt-tipped right-angle probe 
4) Suction catheter  
5) Alligator forceps 
6) Magnets 
7) Catheters (fogarty or Swanz-Ganz) 
 
9) Describe a stepwise approach to pediatric FB airway obstruction 
 
Most airway foreign bodies are seen in pediatric patients and may not be visible on plain 
films. A normal radiograph does not rule out an aspirated foreign body. If stridor +/- unwell 
proceed immediately to the following: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CrackCast Show Notes – Foreign Bodies – January 2017 
www.canadiem.org/crackcast 
 
 
  
1) Forced expulsion of the foreign body (J-thrusts / chest compressions if LOC); or 
 
2) Direct laryngoscopy with attempted manual removal; or  
 
3) Intubation, while pushing the foreign body distally; or 
 
4) Cricothyroidotomy / transtracheal ventilation in young children 
 
10) List 7 symptoms of Esophageal FB 
 
- Witnesses or self-reported history of ingestion (eg. coin / food / toys / bones / batteries / 
wood / glass) 
- Atypical chest pain / neck pain 
- FB sensation 
- Odynophagia / dysphagia 
- Drooling 
- Retching / vomiting 
- Anorexia 
- Wheezing 
 
11) List 8 complications of esophageal FB 
 
- Erosion or Perforation 
- Tracheal compression 
- Mediastinitis 
- Esophagus-to-airway or esophagus-to-vascular fistulae 
- Spondylodiskitis 
- Extraluminal migration 
- Abscess development 
- Strictures or false esophageal diverticula 
 
12) List 4 complications specific to button battery ingestions 
 
- Esophageal rupture 
- Mediastinitis 
- Liquefaction necrosis (potassium containing batteries) 
- Heavy metal poisoning 
 
13) List indications for removal of esophageal FBs 
 
- Button battery 
- Magnet 
- Sharp Object 
- Displaced esophageal stent 
- Duration, in place > 24 hours 
 
CrackCast Show Notes – Foreign Bodies – January 2017 
www.canadiem.org/crackcast 
 
 
14) List 4 removal techniques of esophageal FB 
 
- Endoscopy 
- Contrast filled balloon catheter and fluoroscopy 
- Bougienage (pushing object into stomach) 
- Expectant management 
 
15) List 5 techniques for management of food bolus & their MOA 
 
1) Glucagon (0.5 to 2 mg) IV (Glucagon receptor agonist) - Theoretical action is 
lowering the smooth muscle tone at the lower esophageal sphincter without inhibiting 
normal esophageal peristalsis. Data is unsupporting of its use in modern treatment 
 
2) Benzodiazepine (GABA agonist): Anxiolytic +/- improves effect of Glucagon 
 
3) Nitroglycerin (Nitric oxide which is a potent vaso-dilator) thought to work to relax 
lower esophageal sphincter tone 
 
4) Nifedipine (Calcium Channel Blocker) - thought to work to relax lower esophageal 
sphincter tone 
 
5) Enzymatic degradation w/ proteolytic enzyme papain or coca-cola - ineffective and 
has fallen out of favour 
 
16) List the criteria for continued expectant management of intestinal FB 
 
1) The object has not passed in the stool yet 
2) No presence of bowel obstruction / perforation 
3) Progression on 2x Xrays 24hours apart 
4) No presence of drug intoxication with body packers/stuffers 
 
Otherwise: Surgical management indicated 
 
17) Describe the stepwise management of a Rectal FB 
 
- Patient sedation / analgesia 
- Removal with single digit and abdo pressure 
- Anoscopy / Vaginal Speculum w/ Ring Forceps 
- Advancement of foley catheter past object with gas insufflation to “Break Vacuum” effect 
 
CrackCast Show Notes – Foreign Bodies – January 2017 
www.canadiem.org/crackcast 
 
 
Wisecracks:  
 
1) What is the safe dose of topical anesthetics? 
 
 
http://rebelem.com/topical-anesthetic-use-corneal-abrasions/ 
 
http://thesgem.com/2016/01/sgem145-topical-anesthetics-for-ed-patients-with-corneal-
abrasions/ 
 
According to UptoDate: Safe amount for: 
 
Tetracaine: 1-2 drops q5-10min to max 5 doses 
Alcaine (proparacaine): 1 drop q5-10min for max 5-7 doses 
 
2) How do you test the radiolucency of an object? 
 
Take a piece of the same material, and place it over the patient's shoulder when using plain 
radiography: compare the radiolucency to the rest of the body structures and help locate the 
object!  
 
 
 
3) What is a Cafe Coronary? What is Penetration Syndrome? 
 
Cafe Coronary - True airway obstruction from food bolus confused with myocardial infarction 
 
Penetration Syndrome - Airway obstruction with resolution, patients may report choking 
sensation accompanied by respiratory distress with coughing, wheezing, and dyspnea, and 
subsequent resolution with expulsion +/- swallowing of foreign body 
 
 
 
 
4) Differentiate Body Stuffing from Body Packing 
 
As per Rosen’s: 
 
Body stuffing - “denotes hurried ingestion of hastily prepared packages in the face of 
imminent police presence” 
 
Body packing - “entails systematic gastrointestinal 
tract placement of previously prepared drug 
packages”  
 
